ALG
“I daresay you’ll see her soon,” said the Rose. “She’s one of the
lives—”
Turning a little blue,
King said, referring to his book. “I couldn’t send all the horses, you
punished?”
CHAPTER III. Looking-Glass Insects
for some one to speak.
done (as well as she could make it out) by the branches rubbing one
The Red Queen broke the silence by saying to the White Queen, “I invite
wouldn’t it?”
“Then fill up the glasses with treacle and ink,
and sometimes under trees, but always with the same tall river-banks
the Sheep: “but you can’t look _all_ round you—unless you’ve got eyes
“Bread-and-butter, of course. Try another Subtraction sum. Take a bone
“I talks English, doesn’t I?” the Frog went on. “Or are you deaf? What
‘_Ways and Means_’: but that’s only what it’s _called_, you know!”
‘I weep for you,’ the Walrus said.
bread-and-butter. “They’re getting on very well,” he said in a choking
Whose face was very like a crow,
To leave the oyster-bed.
I thanked him much for telling me
Those of the largest size.
would be _such_ a treat! May I?”
“Is it very long?” Alice asked, for she had heard a good deal of poetry
A tale begun in other days,
For a few minutes all went on well, and she was just saying, “I really
“I suppose so,” the other sulkily replied, as he crawled out of the
Wax-works weren’t made to be looked at for nothing, nohow!”
CHAPTER XI.
were dancing round in a ring. This seemed quite natural (she remembered
and the other person always waited for _you_ to begin, you see nobody
“And _I_ hit everything within reach,” cried Tweedledum, “whether I can
Lingering onward dreamily
“Where do you come from?” said the Red Queen. “And where are you going?
small voice, close to her ear, said, “You might make a joke on
“Exactly so. Well, then, ‘_mimsy_’ is ‘flimsy and miserable’ (there’s
silence, and Alice lifted up her head in some alarm. There was no one
On this occasion the kitten only purred: and it was impossible to guess
another, and it would be almost certain to be an ugly one. But then the
“I didn’t know it,” the Knight said, a shade of vexation passing over
rolling round the room in great lumps—and knocking over the tables and
“A nasty, vicious temper,” the Red Queen remarked; and then there was
been a new one.”
about by swinging itself from branch to branch.”
Tweedledum with great solemn eyes, and not noticing Alice’s question.
Alice thought it would never do to have an argument at the very
Alice had to hold both her hands over her ears.
faces—others upset the decanters, and drank the wine as it ran off the
heavy crash shook the forest from end to end.
far as you can see, only you know it may be quite different on beyond.
Of all the strange things that Alice saw in her journey Through The
herself, as she watched the horse walking leisurely along the road, and
“Hay, then,” the King murmured in a faint whisper.
his cheek: but not a word would he say.
As the Knight sang the last words of the ballad, he gathered up the
“That’s a great deal to make one word mean,” Alice said in a thoughtful
“Let’s fight till six, and then have dinner,” said Tweedledum.
rushes as the boat glided by, there was always a more lovely one that
scrubbing a White Queen? Really, it’s most disrespectful of you!
PIECES.        PAWNS.        PAWNS.      PIECES.
nothing but hug the little Lily in silence. As soon as she had
she took it. “If he smiled much more, the ends of his mouth might meet
Queens had already taken two of them, but the middle one was empty.
____
she took in like a picture, as, with one hand shading her eyes, she
“You can’t possibly do that,” said the Rose: “_I_ should advise you to
another portmanteau for you). And a ‘_borogove_’ is a thin
your balance properly. Like this, you know—”
Before his streaming eyes.
same. Now if you had the two eyes on the same side of the nose, for
was a _little_ offended: and they walked on in silence till they got to
to-day,” Alice began, a little frightened at finding that, the moment
elbow-deep to get the rushes a good long way down before breaking them
lost the comb yesterday.”
into candles—because they want to turn into Snap-dragon-flies!”
hear that he was talking on in his usual tone. “All kinds of fastness,”
nohow.”
My heart went hop, my heart went thump;
they’ve each got ‘TWEEDLE’ round at the back of the collar,” she said
Queen to disbelieve it. “I’ll try it when I go home,” she thought to
“Of course it is,” said the Queen, “what would you have it?”
that they couldn’t, because there were only two of them, and Alice had
“She can’t do Addition,” the Red Queen interrupted. “Can you do
without speaking. Alice looked from one to the other in some
“But why don’t you scream now?” Alice asked, holding her hands ready to
At the next peg the Queen turned again, and this time she said, “Speak
till they came in sight of a great crowd, in the middle of which the
A new difficulty came into Alice’s head. “Supposing it couldn’t find
thoughtful tone.
“I know you are a friend,” the little voice went on; “a dear friend,
I told them ‘This is what I wish.’
woke me out of oh! such a nice dream! And you’ve been along with me,
_shall_ do it this time—” when the path gave a sudden twist and shook
this led to a scramble, in which the ball rolled down upon the floor,
“I’ll settle it,” Alice said to herself, “when the road divides and
“But that must happen very often,” Alice remarked thoughtfully.
umbrella and seized her by the wrist.
“It gets easier further on,” Humpty Dumpty replied.
At any other time, Alice would have felt surprised at this, but she was
inches, and began measuring the ground, and sticking little pegs in
He said ‘You needn’t shout so loud!’
“Of course I’ll wait,” said Alice: “and thank you very much for coming
To which the Queen replied, “You haven’t got any whiskers.”
the saddle, keeping hold of Alice’s hair with one hand, to save himself
with so much floating in the air, and was rather glad to find herself
towards Alice’s chair, and beckoning to her impatiently to get out of
“‘O Looking-Glass creatures,’ quoth Alice, ‘draw near!
“Can _you_ do sums?” Alice said, turning suddenly on the White Queen,
Nor heard thy silver laughter;
The way he got his wealth,
_I’ll_ be all the rest.” And once she had really frightened her old
mayhap you’ll never see such another: and to show you I’m not proud,
“To guard against the bites of sharks,” the Knight replied. “It’s an
little doll, and was now on the table, merrily running round and round
Some gave them white bread, some gave them brown;
wonderfully small sigh, that she wouldn’t have heard it at all, if it
‘It seems a shame,’ the Walrus said,
“Nine from eight I can’t, you know,” Alice replied very readily: “but—”
“A dear little crab!” thought Alice. “I should like that.”
fall.
Until his face was blue:
Came whiffling through the tulgey wood,
2. W. Q. to Q. B.’s 4th (_after shawl_)
But I was thinking of a way
trotted off, Alice repeating to herself, as she ran, the words of the
“I know what he came for,” said Alice: “he wanted to punish the fish,
to go.”
complaining tone: “I’ve a great mind to go and wake him, and see what
And always use so large a fan
“You know,” he added very gravely, “it’s one of the most serious things
‘and how is it you live?’
have run him through with your horn, you know.”
“Are five nights warmer than one night, then?” Alice ventured to ask.
just to make it look as if they had a fire. Well then, the books are
“Why, look here!” the Red Queen cried. “The dog would lose its temper,
letter! Isn’t _that_ grand! However, don’t be discouraged. You’ll come
she said to herself. “I’m as certain of it, as if his name were written
Startled as she was, Alice was more frightened for him than for herself
think I didn’t know the answer to _that_? Ask another.”
“but you can have the umbrella—it’s quite as sharp. Only we must begin
day at a time.”
shabby-looking bird with its feathers sticking out all round—something
nurse by shouting suddenly in her ear, “Nurse! Do let’s pretend that
down and—no, I won’t _just_ yet,” she went on, checking herself just as
And so go on from day to day
It was not a very difficult question to answer, as there was only one
Humpty Dumpty took the book, and looked at it carefully. “That seems to
hall, and would have gone straight out at the door in the same way, if
see _that_ bit! I want so much to know whether they’ve a fire in the
“Don’t let us quarrel,” the White Queen said in an anxious tone. “What
bell-handle; one was marked “Visitors’ Bell,” and the other “Servants’
*      *      *      *      *      *
“In the water, of course!” said the Sheep, sticking some of the needles
gracefully about in the wind, “I _wish_ you could talk!”
peg, she was gone. Whether she vanished into the air, or whether she
a snap.
_RED._
“What do you call yourself?” the Fawn said at last. Such a soft sweet
hastily, “or we shall get no dinner at all. May I give you some?”
and began to arrange her new-found treasures.
.ebargtuo shtar emom eht dnA
“Ah, what _is_ it, now?” the Unicorn cried eagerly. “You’ll never
once towards the Red Queen. To her surprise, she lost sight of her in a
Alice was very anxious to be of use, and, as the poor little Lily was
pick me up again in a minute, _they_ would! However, this conversation
“‘First, the fish must be caught.’
and had the ink all ready to throw over him, in case he fainted again),
be one marked ‘Queen,’ you know—”
It went through and through my head like an earthquake!”
at first Alice could not make out which was which: but she soon managed
“That wouldn’t be at all the thing,” the Red Queen said very decidedly:
“—but there’s one great advantage in it, that one’s memory works both
“If that there King was to wake,” added Tweedledum, “you’d go
“Only in the usual way,” Alice said, smiling.
or three of them. “The great art of riding, as I was saying, is—to keep
“It’s new, I tell you—I bought it yesterday—my nice new RATTLE!” and
Dinah have finished with your White Majesty, I wonder? That must be the
“I only hope the boat won’t tipple over!” she said to herself. “Oh,
Alice watched the White King as he slowly struggled up from bar to bar,
hurt by the fall. He had a right to be a _little_ annoyed with the
needn’t be so angry about an old rattle.”
CHAPTER X.
When the feast’s over, we’ll go to the ball—
good directly,” she added, “I’ll put you through into Looking-glass
because there wouldn’t be any name for her to call, and of course you
And waited in a row.
“As to poetry, you know,” said Humpty Dumpty, stretching out one of his
are!” She added in a tone of delight, and her heart began to beat quick
you. I meant ‘there’s a nice knock-down argument for you!’”
my body happens to be?” he said. “My mind goes on working all the same.
Children yet, the tale to hear,
Alice enquired.
The Walrus did beseech.
is to make holes like a gimlet.”
but wherever the road divided there were sure to be two finger-posts
get into the Third Square!”
to stay. So she got up, and held out her hand. “Good-bye, till we meet
pretending to watch the progress of the winding, and now and then
“Selfish things!” thought Alice, and she was just going to say
to distinguish the Unicorn by his horn.
it up to a glass, the words will all go the right way again.”
very civilly went to meet her with the shawl.
changed the subject of the conversation. “What do you mean by ‘If you
into her hair, as her hands were full. “Feather, I say!”
so Alice tried to submit to it with a good grace.
to be seen, and her first thought was that she must have been dreaming
7. W.Kt. takes R.Kt.
away.
watching the White King (for she was still a little anxious about him,
“The question is,” said Alice, “whether you _can_ make words mean so
then leaving off to look at her through a great pair of spectacles.
“Are there many crabs here?” said Alice.
know. Oh, what fun it is! How I _wish_ I was one of them! I wouldn’t
Alice was glad to see that it revived him a good deal. “There’s nothing
friends just yet, for I’m not sure.
“But that’s not _your_ fault,” the Rose added kindly: “you’re beginning
under _here_. Nohow.”
she crossed the little brook after the Queen.
then he took the helmet off again—but it took hours and hours to get me
‘By which I get my wealth—
In autumn, when the leaves are brown,
cinders. “My precious Lily! My imperial kitten!” and she began
Alice moving under skies
The next moment soldiers came running through the wood, at first in
“Well, there’s the Horse-fly,” Alice began, counting off the names on
can’t think!” (“She _never_ could, you know,” said the Red Queen.) “And
That is easy, and will not take more than a minute.
she repeated, catching hold of the little creature in the very act of
*      *      *      *      *      *
“It’s _my_ opinion that you never think _at all_,” the Rose said in a
remarked, putting on his helmet too.
“To ‘_gyre_’ is to go round and round like a gyroscope. To ‘_gimble_’
guests, and candles came crashing down together in a heap on the floor.
The pleasance of our fairy-tale.
CHAPTER IX. Queen Alice
use without them.” He unfastened it as he spoke, and was just going to
“Speak, won’t you!” cried the King. “How are they getting on with the
‘After such kindness, that would be
when she had come within a few yards of it, she saw that it had eyes
“I can’t say,” the Gnat replied. “Further on, in the wood down there,
to that—”
pins!—may I put your shawl straight for you?” she added aloud.
pardon!” she added in dismay, for Humpty Dumpty looked thoroughly
“I sent a message to the fish:
still the Queen cried “Faster! Faster!” and dragged her along. “Are we
“But if you _hadn’t_ done them,” the Queen said, “that would have been
and the Unicorn): “fair play with the cake, you know!”
she doesn’t know her own name!”
_WHITE._
“If I’d meant that, I’d have said it,” said Humpty Dumpty.
“I though you meant ‘How old _are_ you?’” Alice explained.
the wood—What’s the dish for?”
up, “I hope no bones are broken?”
After a while the noise seemed gradually to die away, till all was dead
water, she thought, as every now and then the oars got fast in it, and
was so dusty and hot, and the elephants did tease so!’”
pretend that you’re the Red Queen, Kitty! Do you know, I think if you
“I know what you’re thinking about,” said Tweedledum: “but it isn’t so,
memorandum-book out of his pocket, and began writing. A sudden thought
hasn’t!”
“It was a glorious victory, wasn’t it?” said the White Knight, as he
All mimsy were the borogoves,
“It’s only a rattle,” Alice said, after a careful examination of the
“And what does ‘_outgrabe_’ mean?”
him drop upon the floor.
“Well, if she said ‘Miss,’ and didn’t say anything more,” the Gnat
“What a curious helmet you’ve got!” she said cheerfully. “Is that your
struck her. “Why, it’s a Looking-glass book, of course! And if I hold
However, there was the hill full in sight, so there was nothing to be
“I shouldn’t know you again if we _did_ meet,” Humpty Dumpty replied in
behind,” she thought: “and then I don’t know what would happen to his
‘Let it lie in a dish!’
and he hung it carefully on a tree. “Can you guess why I did that?” he
and one to go?”
hands, and she found they were in a little boat, gliding along between
got _some_ sense in it, though it’s not a clever one!’ Still, you’re
remark into a sort of a compliment.
of alarm came into its beautiful brown eyes, and in another moment it
They were standing under a tree, each with an arm round the other’s
suppose—no, it doesn’t! This goes straight back to the house! Well
best—if he didn’t eat so many as the Walrus.”
kisses them so gently? And then it covers them up snug, you know, with
Child of the pure unclouded brow
neither hear her nor see her.
as _I_ can do to see real people, by this light!”
eagerly that, when the two great heads vanished from her lap, she
breath, and shut your eyes.”
Alice didn’t like being criticised, so she began asking questions.
to guess her thoughts, for she cried, “Faster! Don’t try to talk!”
always touched the ground directly. So I had a _very_ little way to
For Tweedledum said Tweedledee
she couldn’t reach.
“Would you—be good enough,” Alice panted out, after running a little
Still she haunts me, phantomwise,
voices went on. “There wasn’t room for one where she came from. The
10. Alice castles (_feast_)
wringing her hands. “Oh, ever so much more than that!”
“This is a child!” Haigha replied eagerly, coming in front of Alice to
to remember that she was a Pawn, and that it would soon be time for her
“Mind you come up—the regular way—don’t get blown up!”
“And only _one_ for birthday presents, you know. There’s glory for
I daresay you’ve not had many lessons in manners yet?”
itself, I wonder? I do believe it’s got no name—why, to be sure it
again.
one.”
Tweedledee looked at his watch, and said “Half-past four.”
3. Alice meets W. Q. (_with shawl_)
fancy calling everything you met ‘Alice,’ till one of them answered!
“We’d better take it with us,” the Knight said. “It’ll come in handy if
walking again in the natural way.
sat down, panting, while the King called out “Ten minutes allowed for
would only purr for ‘yes’ and mew for ‘no,’ or any rule of that sort,”
be the good of having it all over again?”
_here_, we mostly have days and nights two or three at a time, and
deny _something_—only she doesn’t know what to deny!”
verse, and Alice thought with a shudder, “I wouldn’t have been the
table, at that rate. I’d far better help you, hadn’t I?” But the King
“Just so!” cried the Red Queen. “Five times as warm, _and_ five times
Frog, who was sitting under a tree, got up and hobbled slowly towards
certainly not the next _course_.”
play; and you’re in the Second Square to begin with: when you get to
Children three that nestle near,
However, now you’ve got your breath, you may tell us what’s happened in
Enough that now thou wilt not fail
down there? They can’t be bees—nobody ever saw bees a mile off, you
“That’s hardly enough,” he said, anxiously. “You see the wind is so
grown a good deal!” was her first remark. She had indeed: when Alice
Till the feast’s ready, we’ve time for a nap:
in her ear, “Never mind what they all say, my dear, but take a
Alice—Pudding. Remove the pudding!” and the waiters took it away so
frowning at Alice as she spoke.
you know.” Then he went up and gave the door a kick with one of his
they nearly lifted her up into the air: “I rise to return thanks—”
because I’ve held up one of our books to the glass, and then they hold
He looked so vexed at the idea, that Alice changed the subject hastily.
turned for a moment to say “good-bye,” and then hurried on to the last.
And when I found the door was locked,
pockets. “I had the best of it this time?” he said to the King, just
“But you’ve got a bee-hive—or something like one—fastened to the
“We gave you the opportunity of doing it,” the Red Queen remarked: “but
try and find my way to the top of that hill—”
“Thank you very much,” said Alice. “May I help you off with your
W. Queen.      “Lily.”       Tiger-lily. R. Queen.
got up to do it, very obediently, but a little frightened.
time to save himself from tumbling off again.
Pleased a simple tale to hear—
“I see it now,” Alice remarked thoughtfully: “and what are ‘_toves_’?”
the White King seated on the ground, busily writing in his
“What is it you want to buy?” the Sheep said at last, looking up for a
“And yet I don’t know,” the Gnat went on in a careless tone: “only
Alice’s other shoulder, “just sing it through to _me_. I’m getting
up before the kitten as a model for it to imitate: however, the thing
broke off with a frown, and, after thinking for a minute, suddenly
Alice would have said something pitying to comfort it, “If it would
is, jam to-morrow and jam yesterday—but never jam to-day.”
“No, it can’t,” said the Queen. “It’s jam every _other_ day: to-day
hurting the other one’s feelings; so, as the best way out of the
Alice considered. “The bone wouldn’t remain, of course, if I took
side to side, and the ground between was divided up into squares by a
herself with turning round, looking at the shelves as she came to them.
“I do my best,” the Messenger said in a sulky tone. “I’m sure nobody
surprise, she was down on her hands and knees watching them. The
‘A pleasant walk, a pleasant talk,
I pulled and pushed and kicked and knocked.
“Meanwhile, we’ll drink your health—Queen Alice’s health!” she screamed
down into the Looking-glass room. The very first thing she did was to
away at first. “And what enormous flowers they must be!” was her next
I tried to turn the handle, but—”
on, with a tassel, and he was lying crumpled up into a sort of untidy
assure you!” he said. He raised his hands in some excitement as he said
you’d better not come _very_ close,” he added: “I generally hit
This time it was a White Knight. He drew up at Alice’s side, and
_little_ sorry for the poor oysters.”
“And hast thou slain the Jabberwock?
sounds!” A very few steps brought her to the edge of the brook. “The
back, you know. That’s the end of my move.”
unsatisfactory—” (she repeated this aloud, as it was a great comfort to
melancholy voice. “It’s out of temper, I think. I’ve pinned it here,
the _next_ course,” the Knight said in a slow thoughtful tone: “no,
“I haven’t got a nightcap with me,” said Alice, as she tried to obey
the time we’ve finished!”
And welcome Queen Alice with ninety-times-nine!”
whom she considered as the cause of all the mischief—but the Queen was
banks: so there was nothing for it but to do her best.
“Of course you know your A B C?” said the Red Queen.
said ‘Leave off at seven’—but it’s too late now.”
think how convenient it would be if you could manage to go home without
Alice had seated herself on the bank of a little brook, with the great
They sent an answer back to me.
mind to go on: “for I certainly won’t go _back_,” she thought to
you ought to speak.”
walk the other way.”
“Take care of yourself!” screamed the White Queen, seizing Alice’s hair
_thinking in chorus_ means—for I must confess that _I_ don’t), “Better
“They don’t keep this room so tidy as the other,” Alice thought to
perhaps I may visit the elephants later on. Besides, I do so want to
‘Why, what a temper you are in!’
couldn’t help pointing her finger at Tweedledum, and saying “First
and Alice was a little alarmed at what she had done, and went round the
dinner: then, when the miserable day came, I should have to go without
In the silent night.
Well, this is the very queerest shop I ever saw!”
always coming back to the house, do what she would. Indeed, once, when
done! I’d better go in at once—” and there was a dead silence the
“Contrariwise,” continued Tweedledee, “if it was so, it might be; and
say, as she was helping him up from his fifth tumble.
she opened her lips, there was dead silence, and all eyes were fixed
the egg to do the same.
“Much more smoothly than a live horse,” Alice said, with a little
At this moment she heard a hoarse laugh at her side, and turned to see
with angry looks at being interrupted in their feast, before she
far too much excited to be surprised at anything _now_. “As for _you_,”
“But I don’t see how—”
“Aren’t you sometimes frightened at being planted out here, with nobody
were interesting enough, she felt that it would be far grander to have
hoarse that Alice could scarcely hear him.
“It’s a cravat, child, and a beautiful one, as you say. It’s a present
And scrambling to the shore.
a last; “There are so many candlesticks in the bag.” And he hung it to
“I like them when they can talk,” Alice said. “None of them ever talk,
Alice didn’t want to begin another argument, so she said nothing.
invention of my own. And now help me on. I’ll go with you to the end of
‘But not on us!’ the Oysters cried,
That they could not be seen.
So, resolutely turning her back upon the house, she set out once more
trying to wind up, and had been rolling it up and down till it had all
and broken.”
poor Gnat really seemed to have sighed itself away, for, when Alice
quietly as possible, as if it were quite used to it.
This didn’t sound like a remark that needed any answer, so Alice said
Kitty? You were his wife, my dear, so you ought to know—Oh, Kitty, _do_
After this, Alice was silent for a minute or two, pondering. The Gnat
the one she had left behind. “So I shall be as warm here as I was in
happens!”
had tried to cut the plum-cake, “So I wasn’t dreaming, after all,” she
’Twas brillig, and the slithy toves
deep ditch.
And very gladly will I drink
horse’s feet.
as usual! However, he gets on again pretty easily—that comes of having
only make up your mind. Now, what _do_ you want to buy?”
In a Wonderland they lie,
along the road, and tell me if you can see either of them.”
shaking her, she kept on growing shorter—and fatter—and softer—and
Thy loving smile will surely hail
Tweedledee—the Fifth is mostly water—the Sixth belongs to Humpty
“I’m afraid I can’t quite remember it,” Alice said very politely.
Then came the horses. Having four feet, these managed rather better
for some time without saying anything; but Alice was too strong for
They give me for my toil.’
after her own shawl, which was trailing behind her.
9. Alice becomes Queen
gentle eyes, but didn’t seem at all frightened. “Here then! Here then!”
how many he took: contrariwise.”
this, the Knight with his eyes shut, muttering to himself, and Alice
I’m a hungry hyaena, and you’re a bone.”
“What a fight we might have for the crown, _now_!” the Unicorn said,
“Fighting for the crown?”
The sands were dry as dry.
next _day_. In fact,” he went on, holding his head down, and his voice
herself, as she noticed several of the chessmen down in the hearth
So she got up and walked about—rather stiffly just at first, as she was
directions: “and very like birds they look,” Alice thought to herself,
poetry—all about fishes. Shall she repeat it?”
“I can’t stand this any longer!” she cried as she jumped up and seized
strings and fastening buttons—“Really they’ll be more like bundles of
“I see you don’t,” said Alice.
with bunches of leaves, till she had to beg them to leave off, it blew
“What did you mean it to be made of?” Alice asked, hoping to cheer him
It succeeded beautifully. She had not been walking a minute before she
“You’re wrong _there_, at any rate,” said the Queen: “were _you_ ever
a pause, “was inventing a new pudding during the meat-course.”
Goat’s beard.
shall say good-bye. And at the end of _five_, I shall go!”
without a good long branch to brush them away—and what fun it’ll be
“Yes, but then _I_ came and rescued her!” the White Knight replied.
CHAPTER XII. Which Dreamed it?
exclaimed triumphantly.
Hatta made a desperate effort, and swallowed a large piece of
chimney-piece (you know you can only see the back of it in the
“I mean, what _is_ an un-birthday present?”
and wriggling like an eel, as he came along, with his great hands
Alice did not like shaking hands with either of them first, for fear of
“She never was really well brought up,” the Red Queen went on: “but
Alice carefully released the brush, and did her best to get the hair
“That’s all,” said Humpty Dumpty. “Good-bye.”
*      *      *      *      *      *
Alice could only look puzzled: she was thinking of the pudding.
off.
The Queen propped her up against a tree, and said kindly, “You may rest
that the flowers are always asleep.”
a Bandersnatch!”
she turned a corner rather more quickly than usual, she ran against it
then, slowly beating time with one hand, and with a faint smile
“Tis an honour to see me, a favour to hear:
etiquette to cut any one you’ve been introduced to. Remove the joint!”
the town.”
“Yes, I suppose you’d be over when that was done,” Alice said
The little voice sighed deeply: it was _very_ unhappy, evidently, and
ground with their feet, till suddenly, just as Alice was getting quite
she found he had recovered, and he and the Queen were talking together
happen to have a headache.”
And that’s the way I get my bread—
of that subject, and it would be just as well if you’d mention what you
“Why do you sit out here all alone?” said Alice, not wishing to begin
“I suppose—” Alice was beginning, but the Red Queen answered for her.
“I didn’t say there was nothing _better_,” the King replied. “I said
1. R. Q. to K. R.’s 4th
single thing’s crooked,” Alice thought to herself, “and she’s all over
“Nothing, just now.”
“Please do,” Alice said very politely.
“Now you shall see me pin it on again, all by myself!”
“The cause of lightning,” Alice said very decidedly, for she felt quite
_you_ had made it.”
Alice looked up at the Rocking-horse-fly with great interest, and made
giving his brother an affectionate hug.
CHAPTER VII.
names of some of them.”
And so she did: wandering up and down, and trying turn after turn, but
And childhood’s nest of gladness.
“We _must_ have a bit of a fight, but I don’t care about going on
great deal of trouble.”
rather severe tone.
“I’m not so sure of that,” said the Unicorn.
“Take a minute to think about it, and then guess,” said the Red Queen.
after she had spent a minute or so in vainly pursuing a large bright
“Can you row?” the Sheep asked, handing her a pair of knitting-needles
straight to it—at least, no, it doesn’t do that—” (after going a few
“But I don’t want it done at all!” groaned the poor Queen. “I’ve been
It is a very inconvenient habit of kittens (Alice had once made the
She very soon came to an open field, with a wood on the other side of
Couldn’t put Humpty Dumpty in his place again.”
“I should like to hear it, very much.”
it quite took off Alice’s attention from the angry brother. But he
guessed if you’d been up in the window with me—only Dinah was making
waist!”
anxiety for the queer creature. “That wall is so _very_ narrow!”
He’s in prison now, being punished: and the trial doesn’t even begin
Boy!”
helmet?” It was evidently more than he could manage by himself;
through the wood?”
sounded like the tolling of a great bell.
looking for a hippopotamus. Now, as it happened, there wasn’t such a
What’s that you say?” (pretending that the kitten was speaking.) “Her
“Hold _your_ tongue!” cried the Tiger-lily. “As if _you_ ever saw
other, they began to run.
But the beard seemed to melt away as she touched it, and she found
servant whose business it is to answer the door?” she began angrily.
There was a book lying near Alice on the table, and while she sat
Alice said, as gravely as she could, “They might go different ways.”
Aged man.      Oyster.       Oyster.     Crow.
among the tables and chairs, for the shop was very dark towards the
me—for an un-birthday present.”
amused itself meanwhile by humming round and round her head: at last it
Holding his pocket handkerchief
bottles, they each took a pair of plates, which they hastily fitted on
“Good-night” and leave them, when Tweedledum sprang out from under the
All mimsy were the borogoves,
A dismal thing to do!’
“You _were_ a little grave,” said Alice.
Punch and Judy—What a noise they make when they tumble! Just like a
“What does it mean?”
you don’t mind stopping the boat for a minute.”
know—” and for some time she stood silent, watching one of them that
is going on a little too fast: let’s go back to the last remark but
I said to him, I said it plain,
things before they happen.”
spread out like fans on each side.)
from her shoulder, and lay like a heavy lump in her lap. “I don’t think
The Red Queen made no resistance whatever; only her face grew very
“There was too much dust to see anything. What a time the Monster is,
Alice attended to all these directions, and explained, as well as she
It didn’t sound a comfortable plan, Alice thought, and for a few
satisfied with this, though Alice felt a little nervous at the idea of
objected.
He let go the bridle, and stretched out both his arms to show Alice
“And if you take one from three hundred and sixty-five, what remains?”
each other a hug, and then they held out the two hands that were free,
“In winter, when the fields are white,
caught at the thing nearest to her hand, which happened to be the
“Was it? I didn’t see it,” Said Alice, peeping cautiously over the side
for the name of a town beginning with H. “The other Messenger’s called
opened his eyes or took any further notice of her, she said “Good-bye!”
here! And what _is_ this on my head?” she exclaimed in a tone of
O frabjous day! Callooh! Callay!”
But the Gnat only sighed deeply, while two large tears came rolling
“Have you invented a plan for keeping the hair from being blown off?”
Lovingly shall nestle near.
Or anything else that is pleasant to drink:
“Now one can breathe more easily,” said the Knight, putting back his
There was a pause in the fight just then, and the Lion and the Unicorn
A Goat, that was sitting next to the gentleman in white, shut his eyes
To feed oneself on batter,
“The great art of riding,” the Knight suddenly began in a loud voice,
CHAPTER IX.
“We must support you, you know,” the White Queen whispered, as Alice
“Take care!” cried Alice. “You’re holding it all crooked!” And she
for a little argument, “and if you only spoke when you were spoken to,
“Why the Lion and the Unicorn, of course,” said the King.
scrambled back into the arm-chair, taking the kitten and the worsted
The storm-wind’s moody madness—
pretend.” She had had quite a long argument with her sister only the
“I haven’t, indeed!” Alice said very gently. “It’s in a book.”
Beware the Jubjub bird, and shun
“What tremendously easy riddles you ask!” Humpty Dumpty growled out.
isn’t any _other_ day, you know.”
“I only said ‘if’!” poor Alice pleaded in a piteous tone.
always makes one a little giddy at first—”
I saw an aged aged man,
know, because two of them are wanted in the game. And I haven’t sent
Alice could not help her lips curling up into a smile as she began: “Do
the Eighth Square you’ll be a Queen—” Just at this moment, somehow or
They hadn’t gone much farther before the blade of one of the oars got
“Then if the dog went away, its temper would remain!” the Queen
“Yes, I did,” said Alice: “several thousand, I should think.”
“You couldn’t have it if you _did_ want it,” the Queen said. “The rule
no longer at her side—she had suddenly dwindled down to the size of a
very cool and shady. “Well, at any rate it’s a great comfort,” she said
I make them into mutton-pies,
and shook itself free from Alice’s arms. “I’m a Fawn!” it cried out in
mind being a Pawn, if only I might join—though of course I should
really are a Queen’? What right have you to call yourself so? You can’t
corrected herself.
“And how fast it comes! Why, I do believe it’s got wings!”
“This young lady loves you with an H,” the King said, introducing Alice
_falling_ off.”
“Quite right,” said the King: “this young lady saw him too. So of
called boughs!”
Alice didn’t know what to say to this: it wasn’t at all like
talking more to herself than the kitten. “What _would_ they do at the
“Then it really _has_ happened, after all! And now, who am I? I _will_
beautiful cravat, I should have said—no, a belt, I mean—I beg your
“being on the top of his head.”
voice came from; “if you’re so anxious to have a joke made, why don’t
*      *      *      *      *      *
what had happened at all. Was she in a shop? And was that really—was it
assistance, you might have left off at seven.”
the pudding!” and there it was again in a moment like a
exactly like other people.”
kitten only began on the other paw, and pretended it hadn’t heard the
blows—oh, that’s very pretty!” cried Alice, dropping the ball of
“Where I am now, of course,” said Alice.
could not help starting back, but in another moment she recovered
could, that she had lost her way.
“_One_ can’t, perhaps,” said Humpty Dumpty, “but _two_ can. With proper
I went and shouted in his ear.”
soldier in all her life.
as politely as she could, “would you please tell me first which road—”
hill she had been so long aiming at.
very glad to get out of the wood into an open place, where she found
That’s what _I_ say!”
2. Alice through Q.’s 3d (_by railwayv) to 4th (_Tweedledum and Tweedledee_)
only don’t cry!”
His accents mild took up the tale:
“I don’t know,” said Alice. “I lost count.”
your age, I always did it for half-an-hour a day. Why, sometimes I’ve
like that.” She was now working with fourteen pairs at once, and Alice
foolish to cry about it.” So she brushed away her tears, and went on as
only started back a little, and then stood looking at her again.
Sheep.         Oyster.       Oyster.     Walrus.
“Well, I don’t want any _to-day_, at any rate.”
Eager eye and willing ear,
couldn’t help looking at her in great astonishment.
being played—all over the world—if this _is_ the world at all, you
is the cause of lightning?”
7. W. Kt. to K. B’s 5th
all.”
“You don’t know how to manage Looking-glass cakes,” the Unicorn
‘Who sail on stormy seas;
blinking lazily at Alice, and speaking in a deep hollow tone that
it. “I never thought of that before!” she said.
from a dog: what remains?”
“It can never get at me _here_,” she thought: “it’s far too large to
with each “better,” till it got quite to a squeak at last.
“Oh, it’s too bad!” she cried. “I never saw such a house for getting in
Tweedledum And Tweedledee
“Because people don’t fall off quite so often, when they’ve had much
Alice looked round eagerly, and found that it was the Red Queen. “She’s
a joint before.
“Seven years and six months!” Humpty Dumpty repeated thoughtfully. “An
However, _somebody_ killed _something_: that’s clear, at any rate—”
with her, and began winding up the ball again. But she didn’t get on
door of our drawing-room wide open: and it’s very like our passage as
“So you did, you know,” the Red Queen said to Alice. “Always speak the
“No use to _them_,” said Alice; “but it’s useful to the people who name
Tweedledee began instantly:
‘active.’ You see it’s like a portmanteau—there are two meanings packed
“—then you don’t like all insects?” the Gnat went on, as quietly as if
Whose echoes live in memory yet,
on the counter. For she thought to herself, “They mightn’t be at all
“Oh, it needn’t come to that!” Alice hastily said, hoping to keep him
“It seems very pretty,” she said when she had finished it, “but it’s
And sprinkle the table with buttons and bran:
Of that old man I used to know—
altering most of the pins. “But really you should have a lady’s maid!”
to shake hands with her.
“I’m _good_ enough,” the King said, “only I’m not strong enough. You
“Well, it no use _your_ talking about waking him,” said Tweedledum,
The little fishes’ answer was
looked round in some surprise for the new enemy.
It is easy to set such a dish on the table.
my—” but here another voice broke in “Ahoy! Ahoy! Check!” and Alice
(Alice didn’t venture to ask what he paid them with; and so you see I
glided gently in among the waving rushes. And then the little sleeves
wanted to squeeze me flat!”)
it.”
“Speak when you’re spoken to!” The Queen sharply interrupted her.
didn’t join in this time, as she hadn’t spoken, but to her great
“Let’s hear it,” said Humpty Dumpty. “I can explain all the poems that
So the two brothers went off hand-in-hand into the wood, and returned
Long has paled that sunny sky:
even touching the stairs with her feet; then she floated on through the
“Where do you pick the flower?” the White Queen asked. “In a garden, or
without.”
‘Cut us another slice:
“Fivepence farthing for one—Twopence for two,” the Sheep replied.
her: he was dressed in bright yellow, and had enormous boots on.
trays of white and brown bread. Alice took a piece to taste, but it was
herself actually walking in at the door.
“It _can’t_ go straight, you know, if you pin it all on one side,”
“In spring, when woods are getting green,
come. “You’ve only a few yards to go,” he said, “down the hill and over
“Some people,” said Humpty Dumpty, looking away from her as usual,
know!” putting her hand on the trunk of the tree. “What _does_ it call
As black as a tar-barrel;
up her mind that it must have been just repainted, it looked so bright
at it again?” she ventured to ask.
QUEEN ALICE in large letters, and on each side of the arch there was a
forwards with all her might.
it—and the dog wouldn’t remain; it would come to bite me—and I’m sure
“What is it, now?” the Frog said in a deep hoarse whisper.
it is, out here.”
among the cinders: but in another moment, with a little “Oh!” of
The jaws that bite, the claws that catch!
get out again, the other White Knight came and put it on. He thought it
“Now you talk like a reasonable child,” said Humpty Dumpty, looking
have such a long word to say) “of all the unsatisfactory people I
“You seem very clever at explaining words, Sir,” said Alice. “Would you
“Think again,” it said: “that won’t do.”
“You ought to return thanks in a neat speech,” the Red Queen said,
She glanced rather shyly at the real Queen as she said this, but her
she watched the fight, timidly peeping out from her hiding-place: “one
“Next Boy!” said Alice, passing on to Tweedledee, though she felt quite
with any idea of making another riddle, but simply in her good-natured
“it’ll never do for you to be lolling about on the grass like that!
want to get somewhere else, you must run at least twice as fast as
Rolands’ Macassar Oil—
insect she had been talking to) was balancing itself on a twig just
“Ah, well! They may write such things in a _book_,” Humpty Dumpty said
“I must do it myself, then,” said the Red Queen, and she began:
long way before it, and a long way behind it—”
“She’s all right again now,” said the Red Queen. “Do you know
could find nothing but a bottle of ink, and when she got back with it
“I wonder _why_ it wouldn’t do?” thought Alice, as she groped her way
Alice laughed. “There’s no use trying,” she said: “one _can’t_ believe
was as different as possible. For instance, the pictures on the wall
“It’s only the Red King snoring,” said Tweedledee.
with excitement as she went on. “It’s a great huge game of chess that’s
having a grand game of romps with the ball of worsted Alice had been
There was a long pause.
be a Queen, you know, till you’ve passed the proper examination. And
Holds the lid to the dish, while it lies in the middle:
she would call out ‘come here—,’ and there she would have to leave off,
worsted while I wasn’t looking!
“To answer the door?” he said. “What’s it been asking of?” He was so
he went nearer and rubbed it with his thumb, as if he were trying
it was no use—the Anglo-Saxon attitudes only got more extraordinary
But the black kitten had been finished with earlier in the afternoon,
Tweedledee smiled gently, and began again:
sure. That happened to me once—and the worst of it was, before I could
“Indeed I shan’t!” Alice said rather impatiently. “I don’t belong to
Whose look was mild, whose speech was slow,
lid’s open?”
angrily, half getting up as he spoke.
uncomfortable sort of age. Now if you’d asked _my_ advice, I’d have
Yet twopence-halfpenny is all
Did gyre and gimble in the wabe;
But she couldn’t help thinking to herself, “What dreadful nonsense we
Her screams were so exactly like the whistle of a steam-engine, that
“You alarm me!” said the King. “I feel faint—Give me a ham sandwich!”
Alice almost stamped with irritation at the slow drawl in which he
dish on her knees, and was sawing away diligently with the knife. “It’s
anything else,” Alice thought.
He said ‘I hunt for haddocks’ eyes
it!” she exclaimed triumphantly.
fold its arms properly. So, to punish it, she held it up to the
Languages? What’s the French for fiddle-de-dee?”
A little provoked, she drew back, and after looking everywhere for the
only I don’t sing it,” he added, as an explanation.
enough—’” (here came the favourite little toss of the head), “‘only it
And these I do not sell for gold
The Garden of Live Flowers
Alice. “Did you happen to meet any soldiers, my dear, as you came
All the King’s horses and all the King’s men
week—Suppose they had saved up all _my_ punishments!” she went on,
“I wonder, now, what the Rules of Battle are,” she said to herself, as
all meant for its good.
For wheels of Hansom-cabs.
you, dear child?” he went on, putting his arm affectionately round
she was getting quite chilly with sitting still so long, she got up and
remark) that, whatever you say to them, they _always_ purr. “If they
get back there.”
“One.”
He said ‘I go my ways,
the top of the little hill.
the dish round, and the cake divided itself into three pieces as she
said a thing, that fixes it, and you must take the consequences.”
“It’s a stupid enough name!” Humpty Dumpty interrupted impatiently.
But the little men only looked at each other and grinned.
“Sap and sawdust,” said the Gnat. “Go on with the list.”
“To the Looking-Glass world it was Alice that said,
9. Queens castle
wings so—it makes quite a hurricane in the wood—here’s somebody’s shawl
The Knight looked down proudly at his helmet, which hung from the
“I’m afraid I haven’t got one,” Alice said in a frightened tone: “there
in despair. “Consider what a great girl you are. Consider what a long
he could keep his balance—and, as his eyes were steadily fixed in the
to keep up with her: and still the Queen kept crying “Faster! Faster!”
And then (as Alice afterwards described it) all sorts of things
quite empty: though the others round it were crowded as full as they
[Illustration]
herself, “I wonder if that’s the reason insects are so fond of flying
“What, then you don’t—” the little voice began, when it was drowned by
dismay, as she put her hands up to something very heavy, and fitted
“But it isn’t old!” Tweedledum cried, in a greater fury than ever.
watch: “open your mouth a _little_ wider when you speak, and always say
there was one thing you _would_ have enjoyed—I had such a quantity of
“I wish I knew!” thought poor Alice. She answered, rather sadly,
Please, where _are_ the crabs?”
And the other thing is a mouse-trap. I suppose the mice keep the bees
So rested he by the Tumtum tree,
“Come, fetch out the plum-cake, old man!” the Unicorn went on, turning
course Nobody walks slower than you.”
Unicorn.       Haigha.       Messenger.  Carpenter.
They quite forgot their quarrel.”
4. W. Q. to K. B.’s 8th (_leaves egg on shelf_)
“I’m afraid you must have hurt him,” she said in a trembling voice,
DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.
feel somehow as if I were invisible—”
for him. “I thought it looked a little queer. As I was saying, that
went away.
But these, as it happened, Alice had _not_ got: so she contented
in a frightened whisper—so low, that Alice could hardly hear what they
close to Alice’s ear, “her White Majesty knows a lovely riddle—all in
tight all round her head.
know I should have to get through the Looking-glass again—back into the
and sometimes to herself. Kitty sat very demurely on her knee,
things round them never changed their places at all: however fast they
snow, as they lay in heaps at her feet—but Alice hardly noticed this,
*      *      *      *      *      *      *
CHAPTER X. Shaking
In a moment everybody was holding out a ticket: they were about the
All this time the Guard was looking at her, first through a telescope,
Might drink my noble health.
_was_ a nice check, Kitty, and really I might have won, if it hadn’t
“And then there’s the Butterfly,” Alice went on, after she had taken a
“Why, about _you_!” Tweedledee exclaimed, clapping his hands
“Manners are not taught in lessons,” said Alice. “Lessons teach you to
“Oh! _please_ don’t make such faces, my dear!” she cried out, quite
thoughtful?”
tangled hair dipping into the water—while with bright eager eyes she
But I was thinking of a plan
Had spoiled his nice new rattle.
W. King.       Fawn.         Rose.       R. King.
better still; better, and better, and better!” Her voice went higher
and sticky; and then she went on.
minute or two, while the boat glided gently on, sometimes among beds of
trembling finger at a small white thing lying under the tree.
corkscrew in his hand—”
“And what’s the ‘_gyre_’ and to ‘_gimble_’?”
caught at the brooch; but it was too late: the pin had slipped, and the
find a snap-dragon-fly. Its body is made of plum-pudding, its wings of
me!” she went on, holding up one finger. “I’m going to tell you all
To listen to my fairy-tale.
Their coats were brushed, their faces washed,
certainly the glass _was_ beginning to melt away, just like a bright
And then they rested on a rock
Though time be fleet, and I and thou
“That’s what the name is _called_. The name really _is_ ‘_The Aged Aged
_everything_. That’s the reason the horse has all those anklets round
This sounded nonsense, but Alice very obediently got up, and carried
air with this thumb) “nose in the middle, mouth under. It’s always the
“Don’t you think you’d be safer down on the ground?” Alice went on, not
With eyes, like cinders, all aglow,
she’s redder—and her petals are shorter, I think.”
like to see a little crab to take home with me!” But the Sheep only
again, and the two Knights sat and looked at each other for some time
deafened. She started to her feet and sprang across the little brook in
and sleepy, and his eyes were half shut. “What’s this!” he said,
They wept like anything to see
Just then flew down a monstrous crow,
“I like the Walrus best,” said Alice: “because you see he was a
I can.”
getting lower and lower, “I don’t believe that pudding ever _was_
“Never mind!” Alice said in a soothing tone, and stooping down to the
because—”
be catching a crab directly.”
“That’ll do very well,” said Alice: “and ‘_slithy_’?”
“Three hundred and sixty-four, of course.”
Eager eye and willing ear,
*      *      *      *      *      *      *
This was a puzzler. After a pause, Alice began, “Well! They were _both_
she’s got a head on her—” “She must be sent as a message by the
itself passionately from side to side, and trembling with excitement.
every moment, while the great eyes rolled wildly from side to side.
tone.
“And you do Addition?” the White Queen asked. “What’s one and one and
pair of needles. “You’ll make me giddy soon, if you go on turning round
[Illustration: chessboard]
she wandered on, talking to herself as she went, till, on turning a
“Wrong, as usual,” said the Red Queen: “the dog’s temper would remain.”
scrambled into the dish of roast mutton, and began eagerly lapping up
“Yes, all his horses and all his men,” Humpty Dumpty went on. “They’d
Shall summon to unwelcome bed
White Queen running across the country! She came flying out of the wood
Third Square—by railway, I should think—and you’ll find yourself in the
to take care of you?”
At last the Red Queen began. “You’ve missed the soup and fish,” she
squeeze itself in among the trees. But I wish it wouldn’t flap its
Looking-glass, that it might see how sulky it was—“and if you’re not
was an old Sheep, sitting in an arm-chair knitting, and every now and
an hour (and bearing it pretty well, considering); so you see that it
“All right,” said the Gnat: “half way up that bush, you’ll see a
put her head closer down, “and I’m nearly sure they can’t see me. I
he leant forwards (and as nearly as possible fell off the wall in doing
Looking-Glass Insects
Did gyre and gimble in the wabe;
“That wouldn’t be very nice, I’m afraid—”
of your life.”
“Nothing!” Alice said impatiently. “I’ve been knocking at it!”
rule.”
THE END
“To be able to see Nobody! And at that distance, too! Why, it’s as much
“Well, a ‘_rath_’ is a sort of green pig: but ‘_mome_’ I’m not certain
there was nothing _like_ it.” Which Alice did not venture to deny.
it’s _my_ crown all the while! Let’s run and see them.” And they
“There’s only one sword, you know,” Tweedledum said to his brother:
number of little green hedges, that reached from brook to brook.
I took a corkscrew from the shelf:
‘The butter’s spread too thick!’
She took her off the table as she spoke, and shook her backwards and
instance—or the mouth at the top—that would be _some_ help.”
“As well as _you_ can,” said the Tiger-lily. “And a great deal louder.”
He was dressed in tin armour, which seemed to fit him very badly, and
come to the end of the wood.
measurements.” And she took a ribbon out of her pocket, marked in
“Which reminds me—” the White Queen said, looking down and nervously
never saw one alive before!”
CHAPTER VIII. “It’s my own Invention”
“It’s waiting for “em now,” said Hatta: “this is a bit of it as I’m
Alice, surprised at her own ingenuity.
“Ahoy! Ahoy! Check!” and a Knight dressed in crimson armour came
“What kind of insect?” Alice inquired a little anxiously. What she
you like to hear it?”
to fade, you know—and then one can’t help one’s petals getting a little
“I don’t know what’s the matter with it!” the Queen said, in a
quickly that Alice couldn’t return its bow.
question.
“Don’t tease so,” said Alice, looking about in vain to see where the
“I knew it was!” cried Tweedledum, beginning to stamp about wildly and
was sitting sulkily among the ashes, “Mind the volcano!”
clearly. Years afterwards she could bring the whole scene back again,
Red Queen: then she went down on her knees on the hearth-rug, and put
She spoke to the Red Queen, whose answer was a little wide of the mark.
Now, take a good look at me! I’m one that has spoken to a King, _I_ am:
you’ll know why.”
Wool and Water
voices. “Silence, every one of you!” cried the Tiger-lily, waving
“It didn’t hurt him,” the Unicorn said carelessly, and he was going on,
“I do believe,” said Alice at last, “that they live in the same house!
her, the horse stopped suddenly: “You’re my prisoner!” the Knight
market-place? You get the best view by the old bridge.”
remarked.
looked up into it. “No, I don’t think it is,” he said: “at least—not
To give a hand to each.’
pencil. I can’t manage this one a bit; it writes all manner of things
“You see,” he went on after a pause, “it’s as well to be provided for
with himself in it: which was such an extraordinary thing to do, that
Alice curtseyed again, as she was afraid from the Queen’s tone that she
hundred and one, five months and a day.”
name, she’d call me ‘Miss!’ as the servants do.”
The snoring got more distinct every minute, and sounded more like a
difficulty, she took hold of both hands at once: the next moment they
For some minutes Alice stood without speaking, looking out in all
your business.”
her to put on her shawl again.
very unpleasant characters—” Here she checked herself in some alarm, at
“But what could it do, if any danger came?” Alice asked.
distance, “I shall give you your directions—have another biscuit?”
thoroughly just now—and that shows that there are three hundred and
“Shouldn’t do that—shouldn’t do that—” the Frog muttered. “Vexes it,
you make one yourself?”
without that. Now I’ll give _you_ something to believe. I’m just one
*      *      *      *      *      *      *
like eating hay when you’re faint,” he remarked to her, as he munched
there’s no chance of—but _if_ I did—” Here he pursed his lips and
“I don’t deny things with my _hands_,” Alice objected.
Just then a Fawn came wandering by: it looked at Alice with its large
put its head out for a moment and said “No admittance till the week
“She’s kept none for herself, anyhow,” said the Lion. “Do you like
They said, ‘it _would_ be grand!’
Alice thought, but nothing came of it. “Please, would you tell me what
name?”
Then followed a confused noise of cheering, and Alice thought to
I have not seen thy sunny face,
‘The night is fine,’ the Walrus said
“I never saw anybody that looked stupider,” a Violet said, so suddenly,
“How _can_ you go on talking so quietly, head downwards?” Alice asked,
means the shape I am—and a good handsome shape it is, too. With a name
“And all about a rattle!” said Alice, still hoping to make them a
Walked on a mile or so,
“What manner of things?” said the Queen, looking over the book (in
little.”
begin a conversation with people she had just been dancing with. “It
1
her terror,
darling! What have you got to say for yourself? Now don’t interrupt
‘That they could get it clear?’
conversation, she thought, as he never said anything to _her_; in fact,
Alice glanced nervously along the table, as she walked up the large
“It’s long,” said the Knight, “but very, _very_ beautiful. Everybody
8. Alice to Q.’s 8th (_coronation_)
“What _am_ I to do?” exclaimed Alice, looking about in great
“Oh, don’t go on like that!” cried the poor Queen, wringing her hands
could see nothing but the soles of his feet, she was much relieved to
crowds that they seemed to fill the whole forest. Alice got behind a
“I’ll wait till the song’s over,” thought Alice, “and then I’ll
top shelf of all. It’ll puzzle it to go through the ceiling, I expect!”
falling off in this way, side by side: when they got up again, they
Bell.”
“You needn’t say ‘please’ to _me_ about “em,” the Sheep said, without
Thou shalt not heed the raving blast.
were a number of tiny little brooks running straight across it from
you tell me—” she began, looking timidly at the Red Queen.
it was that they began: all she remembers is, that they were running
‘Lass, with care,’ you know—”
___
CHAPTER III.
“Ninety times nine!” Alice repeated in despair, “Oh, that’ll never be
This offended Alice a little, so there was no more conversation for a
any?” she suggested.
The poor King looked puzzled and unhappy, and struggled with the pencil
“Another sandwich!” said the King.
The Knight looked very much surprised, and a little offended at the
never be able to talk again, she was getting so much out of breath: and
“But that’s a different kind of fastness,” Alice objected.
“No, indeed,” Alice said, a little anxiously.
one knee over the other and clasped his hands round it, “they gave it
remark. “I’m far worse off than you!”
Here the King interrupted, to prevent the quarrel going on: he was very
“Well—yes—a _little_,” Alice replied gently.
answer!” she thought.
This took a very long time to manage, though Alice held the bag open
she was beginning to run down the hill, and trying to find some excuse
The King immediately fell flat on his back, and lay perfectly still:
time—but I can’t do Subtraction, under _any_ circumstances!”
“I think I’ll go down the other way,” she said after a pause: “and
“You’ve been wrong!” cried Tweedledum. “The first thing in a visit is
scream of laughter, in spite of all she could do to prevent it.
plum-cake, Monster?”
so on.
Here something began squeaking on the table behind Alice, and made her
“Well, she has the same awkward shape as you,” the Rose said, “but
“This must be the wood,” she said thoughtfully to herself, “where
Alice thought. Still, she couldn’t feel nervous with it, after they had
into Alice’s other ear, in a voice like the cooing of a pigeon. “It
A-sitting on a gate.”
“Well, ‘_outgrabing_’ is something between bellowing and whistling,
interrupted her impatiently.
could get to the top of that hill: and here’s a path that leads
Alice couldn’t say honestly that he was. He had a tall red night-cap
“I love my love with an H,” Alice couldn’t help beginning, “because he
That sleep among the wheat:
“It sounds like a horse,” Alice thought to herself. And an extremely
twos and threes, then ten or twenty together, and at last in such
queen (whom she spied out at last, a long way off), she thought she
She said afterwards that she had never seen in all her life such a face
The Red Queen said, “That’s a poor thin way of doing things. Now
And this was odd, because it was
“I’ll whisper it,” said the Messenger, putting his hands to his mouth
Which Dreamed it?
they point different ways.”
“I always do,” said the Red Knight, and they began banging away at each
offended, and she began to wish she hadn’t chosen that subject. “If I
There was silence in a moment, and several of the pink daisies turned
“I was wondering what the mouse-trap was for,” said Alice. “It isn’t
*      *      *      *      *      *      *
road, shading her eyes with one hand. “I see somebody now!” she
to it in time.”
Ah, that is so hard that I fear I’m unable!
hadn’t come _quite_ close to her ear. The consequence of this was that
‘O Oysters, come and walk with us!’
to laugh.
Alice couldn’t help smiling as she took out her memorandum-book, and
it _must_ have been either me or the Red King. He was part of my dream,
with the empty dish.
she said, “but _I’ve_ heard nonsense, compared with which that would be
first found her in the ashes, she had been only three inches high—and
catching it for herself. “I’ve got it!” she cried in a triumphant tone.
She was rambling on in this way when she reached the wood: it looked
given the Lion twice as much as me!”
“I’m sure _mine_ only works one way,” Alice remarked. “I can’t remember
“But how _can_ it have got there without my knowing it?” she said to
the Knight tumbling off, first on one side and then on the other. After
‘I’ve a sceptre in hand, I’ve a crown on my head;
of the boat into the dark water. “I wish it hadn’t let go—I should so
tone.
been talking together so long.
However, this was anything but a regular bee: in fact it was an
“It’s the crow!” Tweedledum cried out in a shrill voice of alarm: and
be no harm, she thought, in asking if the game was over. “Please, would
The two Queens looked at each other, and the Red Queen remarked, with a
think of the word. “I mean to get under the—under the—under _this_, you
picked them? Even real scented rushes, you know, last only a very
over yonder—How fast those Queens _can_ run!”
“Kitty, can you play chess? Now, don’t smile, my dear, I’m asking it
go back from here as luggage!”
sun-dials—also they live on cheese.”
“I should never have known who were the right people to invite!”
always pay it extra.”
its way.
couldn’t deny that, even if you tried with both hands.”
There were three chairs at the head of the table; the Red and White
“It’s very good jam,” said the Queen.
thought Alice.
“It’s too late to correct it,” said the Red Queen: “when you’ve once
“Well, in _our_ country,” said Alice, still panting a little, “you’d
They’d eaten every one.”
road through the wood, and the two finger-posts both pointed along it.
shaking himself. “If you do such a thing again, I’ll have you buttered!
exhausted, they stopped, and she found herself sitting on the ground,
“I read it in a book,” said Alice. “But I had some poetry repeated to
“I’m sure I don’t know,” the Lion growled out as he lay down again.
shop, and set the egg upright on a shelf.
May tremble through the story,
Then some one came to me and said,
They would not listen to advice.
what was the matter with the White Queen; but, instead of the Queen,
Alice knocked and rang in vain for a long time, but at last, a very old
remark. “What makes you say that?” he asked, as he scrambled back into
on each side: she would have liked very much to ask them how they came
My fingers into glue
so that the ground was soon covered with little heaps of men.
timid about going into it. However, on second thoughts, she made up her
They hadn’t any feet.
with a kind of sneeze in the middle: however, you’ll hear it done,
—and it really _was_ a kitten, after all.
didn’t like at all, “though, when you say ‘garden,’—_I’ve_ seen
“The piece I’m going to repeat,” he went on without noticing her
seemed so ridiculous—“I shouldn’t be able to cry.”
and very queerly they managed it: some of them put their glasses upon
who was a very thoughtful little girl.
“I only wish _I_ had such eyes,” the King remarked in a fretful tone.
herself, and this was the only way to the Eighth Square.
“A slow sort of country!” said the Queen. “Now, _here_, you see, it
“You are,” said the Sheep: “you’re a little goose.”
“In summer, when the days are long,
his helmet (which hung from the saddle, and was something the shape of
“They gave it me,” Humpty Dumpty continued thoughtfully, as he crossed
In an evening of July—
“Do I look very pale?” said Tweedledum, coming up to have his helmet
mineral?” he said, yawning at every other word.
Alice waited a minute to see if he would speak again, but as he never
“You _should_ have said, ‘It’s extremely kind of you to tell me all
she thought) that, though she managed to pick plenty of beautiful
“Thirst quenched, I hope?” said the Queen.
“Not very likely, perhaps,” said the Knight: “but if they _do_ come, I
‘We cannot do it, Sir, because—‘”
And made them trot so quick!’
down again.
answer to them?”
galloping down upon her, brandishing a great club. Just as he reached
1. Alice meets R. Q.
fifty dinners at once! Well, I shouldn’t mind _that_ much! I’d far
And though the shadow of a sigh
if it were so, it would be; but as it isn’t, it ain’t. That’s logic.”
It was like this.
‘_I give thee all, I can no more_.’” She stood and listened very
So they shook hands, and then the Knight rode slowly away into the
“I always thought they were fabulous monsters!” said the Unicorn. “Is
again, and went flying after it, and this time she succeeded in
“You may look in front of you, and on both sides, if you like,” said
Perhaps you’ll understand the song:
saddle. “Yes,” he said, “but I’ve invented a better one than that—like
going to take “em away.”
the woods look sleepy in the autumn, when the leaves are getting brown.
“Yes, but then I _had_ done the things I was punished for,” said Alice:
“At the end of two yards,” she said, putting in a peg to mark the
only sigh like other people!” she thought. But this was such a
at the moment, and watched him with some anxiety as he mounted again.
“He said he _would_ come in,” the White Queen went on, “because he was
*      *      *      *      *      *
“Well, it isn’t _picked_ at all,” Alice explained: “it’s _ground_—”
a nice crab you caught!” she remarked, as Alice got back into her
I heard him then, for I had just
as wings, and so, with forks for legs, went fluttering about in all
she asked timidly.
introduce her, and spreading out both his hands towards her in an
“You needn’t say ‘exactually,’” the Queen remarked: “I can believe it
frightened this time, and said in an anxious tone, as she picked him
that little brook, and then you’ll be a Queen—But you’ll stay and see
see, a minute goes by so fearfully quick. You might as well try to stop
I do hope it’s _my_ dream, and not the Red King’s! I don’t like
“But what are they for?” Alice asked in a tone of great curiosity.
means well, but she can’t help saying foolish things, as a general
time is worth a thousand pounds a minute!”
very likely there would be any mice on the horse’s back.”
And all the little Oysters stood
Oh, Kitty! how nice it would be if we could only get through into
voice sang another verse;
Alice never could quite make out, in thinking it over afterwards, how
“I see you’re admiring my little box.” the Knight said in a friendly
So, having no reply to give
_did_ seem a little provoking (“almost as if it happened on purpose,”
there, but she feared it would not be quite civil. However, there would
wasn’t thirsty too? Now for number three: you unwound every bit of the
nothing had happened.
better,” she said: “but it wouldn’t be all the better his being
great curiosity.
poetry said to me, all about fishes! To-morrow morning you shall have a
she hadn’t caught hold of the door-post. She was getting a little giddy
off—and for a while Alice forgot all about the Sheep and the knitting,
CHAPTER VI. Humpty Dumpty
uncertain on their feet: they were always tripping over something or
has to do with it.”
And work them into waistcoat-buttons
they see me through the glass in here, and can’t get at me!”
them. “I’m glad they’ve come without waiting to be asked,” she thought:
“I should see the garden far better,” said Alice to herself, “if I
begin kicking: she watched it with great curiosity to see what would
her knitting all the while, just as if nothing had happened. “That was
transport of delight. “There really are—and _such_ beauties!”
the first direction: “and I don’t know any soothing lullabies.”
The eldest Oyster winked his eye,
you’re not real.”
at the back of your head.”
The most curious part of the thing was, that the trees and the other
they’ve got no names—however, go on with your list of insects: you’re
“You needn’t go on making remarks like that,” Humpty Dumpty said:
“Then I’ll have _one_, please,” said Alice, as she put the money down
“Then you’d better not fight to-day,” said Alice, thinking it a good
moment she appeared.
He said ‘I’d go and wake them, if—’
‘I deeply sympathize.’
the dish: the first two or three times that he tried he fell in himself
Alice laughed. “You must hit the _trees_ pretty often, I should think,”
unhappiness of the poor little creature.
handkerchief to him, and waited till he was out of sight.
his head exactly in the path where Alice was walking. She was quite
idea what a difference it makes mixing it with other things—such as
telegraph—” “She must draw the train herself the rest of the way—” and
_couldn’t_ have had any hand in the mischief.
is to be one, I think _I_ ought to invite the guests.”
“That’s just what I complain of,” said Humpty Dumpty. “Your face is the
The Queen gasped and shut her eyes. “I can do Addition, if you give me
A trifle, if you please.’
greedily.
of bread-and-butter in the other.
_two_—to fetch and carry. One to fetch, and one to carry.”
cat, and speaking in as cross a voice as she could manage—and then she
Humpty Dumpty raised his voice almost to a scream as he repeated this
down chimneys—or you couldn’t have known it!”
she was afraid that he really _was_ hurt this time. However, though she
leant against a tree, watching the strange pair, and listening, in a
And all of us are fat!’
think,” said Alice: “I’m so glad it’s gone. I thought it was the night
I set it in a blaze;
kindly tell me the meaning of the poem called ‘Jabberwocky’?”
conjuring-trick. It was so large that she couldn’t help feeling a
Alice sighed and gave it up. “It’s exactly like a riddle with no
“Can _you_ keep from crying by considering things?” she asked.
this, and instantly rolled out of the saddle, and fell headlong into a
King’s ear. Alice was sorry for this, as she wanted to hear the news
“A little—a little,” the King replied, rather nervously. “You shouldn’t
unwisely.
know my name now.” she said, “that’s _some_ comfort. Alice—Alice—I
not say this aloud, for fear of hurting the poor Queen’s feeling.
And yet it was a very clever pudding to invent.”
in the carriage!” thought Alice), saying, “She must go by post, as
“Now, if you’ll only attend, Kitty, and not talk so much, I’ll tell you
And that will purchase nine.
her hand, to watch the kittens. “Tell me, Dinah, did you turn to Humpty
the shawl again!”
“You look a little shy; let me introduce you to that leg of mutton,”
“it means just what I choose it to mean—neither more nor less.”
“I wish Queens never asked questions,” Alice thought to herself.
The Queen gasped, and sat down: the rapid journey through the air had
Which frightened both the heroes so,
The White Queen looked timidly at Alice, who felt she _ought_ to say
CHAPTER IV. Tweedledum And Tweedledee
upon her; “and it’s a very curious thing, I think—every poem was about
“You ought to have a wooden horse on wheels, that you ought!”
And stood awhile in thought.
And now, if e’er by chance I put
everything I can see—when I get really excited.”
the rest of the house is like! Let’s have a look at the garden first!”
learning geography,” thought Alice, as she stood on tiptoe in hopes of
middle.
happened in a moment. The candles all grew up to the ceiling, looking
You could not see a cloud, because
his horse, and if he misses, he tumbles off himself—and another Rule
.YKCOWREBBAJ
the table-cloth with both hands: one good pull, and plates, dishes,
in its first move, you know. So you’ll go _very_ quickly through the
“But it may rain _outside_?”
CHAPTER II. The Garden of Live Flowers
idea that he was joining in the game, while Alice was still hesitating
something like our books, only the words go the wrong way; I know that,
“I haven’t pricked it _yet_,” the Queen said, “but I soon shall—oh, oh,
seemed to take her breath away. At length, as the Tiger-lily only went
of this wood: it’s getting so dark. Would you tell me, please?”
_you_ hadn’t got some too. I thought it was the regular rule.”
That is easy, because it already is in it.
“Certainly not,” the Red Queen said, very decidedly: “it isn’t
maybe—down in the wood yonder—and when you’ve once heard it you’ll be
put over her ears again.
them, I suppose. If not, why do things have names at all?”
She was out of the room in a moment, and ran down stairs—or, at least,
said, “You’re travelling the wrong way,” and shut up the window and
*      *      *      *      *      *      *
than she had lifted the Queen, that she mightn’t take his breath away:
“I’ve sent them all!” the King cried in a tone of delight, on seeing
CHAPTER XI. Waking
Christmas box.”
remarked.
practice.”
hearing something that sounded to her like the puffing of a large
little while—and these, being dream-rushes, melted away almost like
of the White Queen’s hands in her own, and gently stroking it: “she
“They know I can’t get at them!” it panted, bending its quivering head
nearly there?” Alice managed to pant out at last.
I sometimes search the grassy knolls
Of shoes—and ships—and sealing-wax—
As soon as he was comfortably in the saddle, he began once more “You’re
see—then I’m over, you see.”
“I don’t know what you mean by ‘glory,’” Alice said.
“It’s the fresh air that does it,” said the Rose: “wonderfully fine air
attentively, but no tears came into her eyes.
“Who ever said it was?” said the Red Queen.
“When you say ‘hill,’” the Queen interrupted, “_I_ could show you
CHAPTER IV.
“Are you a child or a teetotum?” the Sheep said, as she took up another
to herself, that she couldn’t make it out at all.) “Somehow it seems to
another moment the White Queen came running wildly through the wood,
remark, “was written entirely for your amusement.”
idea. “Something like cottages with the roofs taken off, and stalks put
In fact, the more head downwards I am, the more I keep inventing new
she rubbed its face all over, the wrong way, beginning at the nose: and
interrupted: “not tumbled about anyhow, like yours.”
wasn’t a ticket-office where I came from.” And again the chorus of
This was rather sudden, Alice thought: but, after such a _very_ strong
“If you can _see_ whether I’m singing or not, you’ve sharper eyes than
“In time to have it cooked for the next course?” said Alice. “Well, not
a good subject, after all.
refreshments!” Haigha and Hatta set to work at once, carrying rough
“Too proud?” the other inquired.
petals curled up a little more, she’d be all right.”
for turning shy so suddenly. “It’ll never do to go down among them
Alice ran a little way into the wood, and stopped under a large tree.
“Then you think nothing would remain?” said the Red Queen.
warmth, you know.”
‘To talk of many things:
sudden passion. “You’ve been listening at doors—and behind trees—and
it’ll stop of itself.”
I took a kettle large and new,
face. Humpty Dumpty was sitting with his legs crossed, like a Turk, on
vexed. “I’m not a bird!”
so) and offered Alice his hand. She watched him a little anxiously as
that can possibly happen to one in a battle—to get one’s head cut off.”
here—only I _am_ so hot and thirsty!”
*      *      *      *      *      *      *
Into a left-hand shoe,
“I’m sure I’ll take you with pleasure!” the Queen said. “Twopence a
many days are there in a year?”
anybody! You keep your head under the leaves, and snore away there,
the Queen began screaming so loud that she had to leave the sentence
umbrella: “only _she_ must help us to dress up, you know.”
There was a Beetle sitting next to the Goat (it was a very queer
as well as she could in the dreadful confusion that was beginning.
walked on.
week, and jam every other day.”
“Ridiculous!” cried the Queen. “Why, don’t you see, child—” here she
“Perhaps it would,” Alice replied cautiously.
Who rocked his body to and fro,
Fourth Square in no time. Well, _that_ square belongs to Tweedledum and
horses are! They let them get on and off them just as if they were
One thing was certain, that the _white_ kitten had had nothing to do
of plaster on her finger as she spoke, “there’s the King’s Messenger.
got some one else to dress her, she was so dreadfully untidy. “Every
House. How would you like _that_?”
But for a copper halfpenny,
And the mome raths outgrabe.
together, dear. And I’ll tell you a secret—I can read words of one
“Well, ‘_toves_’ are something like badgers—they’re something like
out. I was as fast as—as lightning, you know.”
fishes in some way. Do you know why they’re so fond of fishes, all
the old song kept ringing through her head like the ticking of a clock,
“I’m afraid I don’t quite understand,” said Alice.
pretending it was arguing with her. “I’m _not_ going in again yet. I
“Why, because there’s nobody with me!” cried Humpty Dumpty. “Did you
afraid that the crown might come off: but she comforted herself with
dark shop, leaning with her elbows on the counter, and opposite to her
“Certainly—certainly!” the King muttered, and beckoned to Haigha. “Open
her fingers.
but she got hold of the edge of the table, and managed to pull herself
I went to wake them up myself.
she had said, “so that one could keep up a conversation! But how _can_
her your nightcap—and sing her a soothing lullaby.”
from beginning.
I were to cut a slice out of _you_, you creature!”
shook hands, and then the Red Knight mounted and galloped off.
for?”
And shed a bitter tear.
It might have been written a hundred times, easily, on that enormous
“Three hundred and sixty-five,” said Alice.
the two brothers took to their heels and were out of sight in a moment.
But before Alice could answer him, the drums began.
reason you were so untidy in my dream—Dinah! do you know that you’re
I wish you were not quite so deaf—
After the day was done—
Alice said “Nobody can guess that.”
was lying quite still and trying to purr—no doubt feeling that it was
me off first?” he added as Alice turned with an eager look in the
“How many acres of ground?” said the White Queen. “You mustn’t leave
“Ditto, ditto” cried Tweedledee.
Whose hair was whiter than the snow,
All this time Tweedledee was trying his best to fold up the umbrella,
Knight. “I’ll see you safe to the end of the wood—and then I must go
“Oh, you wicked little thing!” cried Alice, catching up the kitten, and
“It’s time for you to answer now,” the Queen said, looking at her
for she didn’t like being found fault with so much.
the middle of an accident! Where would be the use of it?” but she did
happen next.
before her! What, you were thirsty, were you? How do you know she
in wool. Alice rubbed her eyes, and looked again. She couldn’t make out
truth—think before you speak—and write it down afterwards.”
invention too?”
The Frog looked at the door with his large dull eyes for a minute: then
Tweedledee.    Daisy.        Daisy.      Humpty Dumpty.
“Tis a privilege high to have dinner and tea
hold your tongues, I’ll pick you!”
And as in uffish thought he stood,
“First you take an upright stick,” said the Knight. “Then you make your
Four other Oysters followed them,
“It’s too ridiculous!” cried Alice, losing all her patience this time.
Autumn frosts have slain July.
“It’s a fabulous monster!” the Unicorn cried out, before Alice could
“I’ll tell thee everything I can;
“have no more sense than a baby!”
couldn’t quite succeed, and it ended in his rolling over, bundled up in
yards along the path, and turning several sharp corners), “but I
Whenever the horse stopped (which it did very often), he fell off in
‘And what it is you do!’
“It’s my own Invention”
cried, as he tumbled off his horse.
state your hair is in!”
and then stopping to help the poor Knight, who certainly was _not_ a
shoulder. “I _am_ so sleepy?” she moaned.
“The prettiest are always further!” she said at last, with a sigh at
have some meaning—and a child’s more important than a joke, I hope. You
verbs—however, _I_ can manage the whole lot of them! Impenetrability!
“You shouldn’t make jokes,” Alice said, “if it makes you so unhappy.”
shutting his mouth and his large eyes—“looking more like a fish than
“It began with blotting paper,” the Knight answered with a groan.
At this moment the door was flung open, and a shrill voice was heard
Tweedledum looked round him with a satisfied smile. “I don’t suppose,”
“It is the voice of my child!” the White Queen cried out as she rushed
your faults. Number one: you squeaked twice while Dinah was washing
‘It’s very rude of him,’ she said,
“Now, Kitty, let’s consider who it was that dreamed it all. This is a
in Alice’s ears, and almost blowing her hair off her head, she fancied.
fill my head with ideas—only I don’t exactly know what they are!
whether it meant “yes” or “no.”
*      *      *      *      *      *      *
She thought that in all her life she had never seen soldiers so
Alice’s hands, and led her up to where the King was sleeping.
and twice as natural!”
“When I make a word do a lot of work like that,” said Humpty Dumpty, “I
Alice was too much puzzled to say anything, so after a minute Humpty
“My _name_ is Alice, but—”
to say a word, and could only wave his hands about, and make the most
“I only meant that I didn’t understand,” said Alice. “Why one to come
“I think that’s the answer.”
looking up from her knitting: “I didn’t put “em there, and I’m not
And dreaming eyes of wonder!
“Didn’t you know _that_?” cried another Daisy, and here they all began
hint that she ought to be going, she felt that it would hardly be civil
thing, that looked sometimes like a doll and sometimes like a work-box,
’Twas brillig, and the slithy toves
Alice could think of nothing better to say than “Indeed?” but she said
“They must be very curious looking creatures.”
“It _must_ come sometimes to ‘jam to-day,’” Alice objected.
from her to the King. “None of your brown bread for me!”
Along the briny beach:
chessmen were walking about, two and two!
“She can’t do Subtraction,” said the White Queen. “Can you do Division?
and queens;” and her sister, who liked being very exact, had argued
However, she didn’t see why the Red Queen should be the only one to
the things go the other way. I can see all of it when I get upon a
“What sort of insects do you rejoice in, where _you_ come from?” the
was to be any conversation at all, she must manage it herself. So she
all what she wanted. So she took it, and ate it as well as she could:
That is easy: a penny, I think, would have bought it.
and so, while Alice was sitting curled up in a corner of the great
directions over the country—and a most curious country it was. There
And when I find a mountain-rill,
“I said you _looked_ like an egg, Sir,” Alice gently explained. “And
conquered her shyness by a great effort and cut a slice and handed it
he said, “there’ll be a tree left standing, for ever so far round, by
“Frumenty and mince pie,” the Gnat replied; “and it makes its nest in a
conversation to the pudding!”
Anglo-Saxon attitude. “We only found it to-day. It’s as large as life,
waving his right arm as he spoke, “is to keep—” Here the sentence ended
there was the leg of mutton sitting in the chair. “Here I am!” cried a
grasshopper.
“But he ate as many as he could get,” said Tweedledum.
nearly screaming herself into a fit, she hastily picked up the Queen
there were so many other curious things to think about.
She stood silent for a minute, thinking: then she suddenly began again.
then, I’ll try it the other way.”
softly repeated to herself:—
“Every one of these things has got to go on, somehow or other.”
“What shall I repeat to her?” said Tweedledee, looking round at
“Then I hope your finger is better now?” Alice said very politely, as
like “bread-and-butter, bread-and-butter,” and Alice felt that if there
messenger for _anything_!”
jumping over a bottle which had just lighted upon the table, “I’ll
where _I_ come from.”
memorandum-book.
Come to my arms, my beamish boy!
“Tweedledum and Tweedledee
Un-dish-cover the fish, or dishcover the riddle?”
“Which door?” said the Frog.
hand in hand, and the Queen went so fast that it was all she could do
left to say so.
in a moment, and she was back again in the little dark shop.
Alice ran to the side of the ditch to look for him. She was rather
voice spoke next. “Change engines—” it said, and was obliged to leave
a shrill scream from the engine, and everybody jumped up in alarm,
This sounded nonsense to Alice, so she said nothing, but set off at
caught at one bunch after another of the darling scented rushes.
his face. “Then all the things must have fallen out! And the box is no
“May I give you a slice?” she said, taking up the knife and fork, and
Alice sat down in it, rather uncomfortable in the silence, and longing
*      *      *      *      *      *      *
Queen had pricked her finger.
were ever invented—and a good many that haven’t been invented just
up into one word.”
held his handkerchief in front, so that the Carpenter couldn’t count
had “DUM” embroidered on his collar, and the other “DEE.” “I suppose
Alice felt there was no denying _that_. “Of course it would be all the
But this did not seem likely to happen. She went on and on, a long way,
“Four thousand two hundred and seven, that’s the exact number,” the
365
with a double ‘e’?”
in the hope of turning off the Messenger’s attention from himself—but
follow, I wonder?”
The Walrus and the Carpenter
you’re a good hand at pinning and tying strings?” Tweedledum remarked.
said the Tiger-lily), “but she’s more bushy than you are.”
tried.”
Then she began looking about, and noticed that what could be seen from
“I never knew them to do it.”
having lost her dear little fellow-traveller so suddenly. “However, I
sat up and folded your arms, you’d look exactly like her. Now do try,
that Alice quite jumped; for it hadn’t spoken before.
“But the things can get _out_,” Alice gently remarked. “Do you know the
one here to scold me away from the fire. Oh, what fun it’ll be, when
“I hope it encouraged him,” she said, as she turned to run down the
“I daresay you haven’t had much practice,” said the Queen. “When I was
cried, clapping her hands triumphantly. “Confess that was what you
“The sun was shining—”
telling her sister the history of all this,) “to find myself singing
Then came the chorus again:—
forget!”
dogs—‘_answers to the name of “Dash:” had on a brass collar_’—just
Queen,” she said as she sat down again, “I shall be able to manage it
good rider.
said the Red Queen. “Alice—Mutton; Mutton—Alice.” The leg of mutton got
And thick and fast they came at last,
he repeated: “but it was careless of him to put another man’s helmet
“To be sure I was!” Humpty Dumpty said gaily, as she turned it round
don’t choose to have them running all about.”
“It’s meant for plum-cake,” said Alice.
other with such fury that Alice got behind a tree to be out of the way
voice: “each of them has been down about eighty-seven times.”
“Well, only on Thursdays,” said the Queen.
“No, you don’t understand,” the Knight said, looking a little vexed.
ways.”
a little now.”
_what_ a lovely one! Only I couldn’t quite reach it.” “And it certainly
and it was _very_ dry; and she thought she had never been so nearly
quite a bunch of needles.
“Well, just then I was inventing a new way of getting over a gate—would
most.” Humpty Dumpty remarked severely. Alice was silent.
“Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall:
loud, forgetting that Humpty Dumpty would hear her.
you may shake hands with me!” And he grinned almost from ear to ear, as
A boat beneath a sunny sky,
nothing, but pulled away. There was something very queer about the
the top of a high wall—such a narrow one that Alice quite wondered how
I said it very loud and clear;
“I—I didn’t know I had to make one—just then,” Alice faltered out.
bound the plaster round her finger with a bit of ribbon.
Queens have to be dignified, you know!”
“Weak tea with cream in it.”
tied on. (He _called_ it a helmet, though it certainly looked much more
a discontented tone, giving her one of his fingers to shake; “you’re so
she added in a kinder tone. “Curtsey while you’re thinking what to say,
“That’s right,” said the Queen, patting her on the head, which Alice
and an old friend. And you won’t hurt me, though I _am_ an insect.”
So with this excuse she ran down the hill and jumped over the first of
ashes will get into it—there, now I think you’re tidy enough!” she
The Lion beat the Unicorn all round the town.
“Her petals are done up close, almost like a dahlia,” the Tiger-lily
thing in the house, that morning.”
takes all the running _you_ can do, to keep in the same place. If you
bow, not knowing whether to be frightened or amused.
“Who did you pass on the road?” the King went on, holding out his hand
hair creep up it, like a fruit-tree. Now the reason hair falls off is
and threw herself down to rest on a lawn as soft as moss, with little
Snowdrop away by the tail just as I had put down the saucer of milk
“There’s some enemy after her, no doubt,” the King said, without even
For it holds it like glue—
And after that other voices went on (“What a number of people there are
flew open, and the Queen clutched wildly at it, and tried to clasp it
The frumious Bandersnatch!”
Come, hearken then, ere voice of dread.
No thought of me shall find a place
Never seen by waking eyes.
fearful faces at the poor King.
“No, I shouldn’t,” said Alice, surprised into contradicting her at
oh!” from poor Alice, it swept her straight off the seat, and down
gardens, compared with which this would be a wilderness.”
as suddenly as it had begun, as the Knight fell heavily on the top of
“I shouldn’t!” Alice exclaimed indignantly. “Besides, if _I’m_ only a
looked up, there was nothing whatever to be seen on the twig, and, as
“And now you know the words,” she added, as she put her head down on
as she spoke.
“Dear me, no!” said the King. “What an idea!”
punished.”
the bag!” he whispered. “Quick! Not that one—that’s full of hay!”
heap, and snoring loud—“fit to snore his head off!” as Tweedledum
“Thank you very much,” she whispered in reply, “but I can do quite well
won’t forget it again. And now, which of these finger-posts ought I to
fun!” Alice got up and curtseyed, and sat down again.
We are but older children, dear,
last.
me see, is this a chair? Why, it’s got branches, I declare! How very
didn’t help much, and all she could say, after a great deal of
same as everybody has—the two eyes, so—” (marking their places in the
And the waiters carried it off, and brought a large plum-pudding in its
However, she wasn’t hurt, and was soon up again: the Sheep went on with
them yet. You know I’m saving up all your punishments for Wednesday
Alice didn’t like this idea at all: so, to change the subject, she
quantity of things they put on—and the trouble they gave her in tying
“Didn’t I tell you?” the King repeated impatiently. “I must have
“Sit up a little more stiffly, dear!” Alice cried with a merry laugh.
minute: there was a rather awkward pause, as Alice didn’t know how to
Alice laughed aloud: but she managed to turn it into a cough, for fear
But chiefly for his wish that he
“To buy!” Alice echoed in a tone that was half astonished and half
“By the way, Kitty, if only you’d been really with me in my dream,
as if it had been only yesterday—the mild blue eyes and kindly smile of
oddest part of it all was, that whenever she looked hard at any shelf,
The knight looked so solemn about it that Alice did not dare to laugh.
with it:—it was the black kitten’s fault entirely. For the white kitten
‘The time has come,’ the Walrus said,
her sister the history of the feast. “You would have thought they
‘Bring it here! Let me sup!’
things—till I was so frightened, I couldn’t remember my own name!”
shaggy hair with both hands, and turning his gentle face and large mild
but they always join on again!”
Alice had no more breath for talking, so they trotted on in silence,
tune: at last she could even make out the words, and she listened so
With sobs and tears he sorted out
reins, and turned his horse’s head along the road by which they had
“‘_The Walrus and the Carpenter_’ is the longest,” Tweedledum replied,
good look at the insect with its head on fire, and had thought to
“nothing ever will!”
suppose is the use of child without any meaning? Even a joke should
_rather_ hard to understand!” (You see she didn’t like to confess, even
“They are that,” said Humpty Dumpty: “also they make their nests under
tone, “one of the best kind. But not a single bee has come near it yet.
CHAPTER VIII.
said to Alice.
Do you suppose,’ the Walrus said,
Alice thought to herself, “I never should _try_ to remember my name in
she began:
about her, if you like—She’s a dear good creature,” he repeated softly
moving about, with the reins hanging loose on his neck, cropping the
direction to which he pointed. “I shan’t be long. You’ll wait and wave
singing:
“Do you know, I was so angry, Kitty,” Alice went on as soon as they
Shining with all his might:
other, and whenever one went down, several more always fell over him,
He went galumphing back.
“The brush has got entangled in it!” the Queen said with a sigh. “And I
part of the roof came off, and ever so much thunder got in—and it went
struck her, and she took hold of the end of the pencil, which came some
too. However, instead of whispering, he simply shouted at the top of
“But she said a great deal more than that!” the White Queen moaned,
For ‘happy summer days’ gone by,
Without, the frost, the blinding snow.
Alice did not know what to say to this, but luckily the Queen did not
grass at her feet—and the black shadows of the forest behind—all this
Faster!” And they ran on for a time in silence, with the wind whistling
Such quantities of sand:
frowning over their heads.
“That accounts for the bleeding, you see,” she said to Alice with a
the two great creatures; but there was no other place for him.
‘Is what we chiefly need:
done but start again. This time she came upon a large flower-bed, with
But the Red Queen drew herself up rather stiffly, and said “Queens
till next Wednesday: and of course the crime comes last of all.”
And welcome Queen Alice with thirty-times-three!”
seemed to be a regular rule that, whenever a horse stumbled the rider
could hold.
towards Alice, “or they wouldn’t dare to do it!”
surprised at his taking it so quietly.
Humpty Dumpty smiled contemptuously. “Of course you don’t—till I tell
“Humpty Dumpty saw it too,” the White Queen went on in a low voice,
little _peep_ of the passage in Looking-glass House, if you leave the
fight?”
of it, and it rang through and through her head till she felt quite
“I’m very glad I happened to be in the way,” Alice said, as she helped
Dreaming as the summers die:
voice from the soup tureen, and Alice turned again, just in time to see
herself. “I meant the other way.”
He said ‘I look for butterflies
spoke. “_This_ door, of course!”
gate—then I stand on my head—then the feet are high enough, you
clasping and unclasping her hands, “we had _such_ a thunderstorm last
“Well, this _is_ grand!” said Alice. “I never expected I should be a
said to herself, “unless—unless we’re all part of the same dream. Only
‘To play them such a trick,
the edge of the tureen, before she disappeared into the soup.
And thumped him on the head.
To keep the Menai bridge from rust
At the two-yard peg she faced round, and said, “A pawn goes two squares
“And you were all the better for it, I know!” the Queen said
as the King made, when he found himself held in the air by an invisible
in a minute with their arms full of things—such as bolsters, blankets,
Along with the Red Queen, the White Queen, and me!’”
“I’ll get one,” the Knight said thoughtfully to himself. “One or
herself. “She gets more and more like a porcupine every minute!”
turned into!”
“Or else what?” said Alice, for the Knight had made a sudden pause.
_I_ shouldn’t remain!”
smile. “Now you understand the way things happen here.”
place, very much relieved to find herself still in the boat.
“What impertinence!” said the Pudding. “I wonder how you’d like it, if
But this is taking us away from Alice’s speech to the kitten. “Let’s
“The face is what one goes by, generally,” Alice remarked in a
that—something about ‘horse’ and ‘hoarse,’ you know.”
“I hope so,” the Knight said doubtfully: “but you didn’t cry so much as
minutes she walked on in silence, puzzling over the idea, and every now
“It is a—_most—provoking_—thing,” he said at last, “when a person
But answer came there none—
Put cats in the coffee, and mice in the tea—
“The horror of that moment,” the King went on, “I shall never, _never_
would ever say anything, so that—”
‘_Haddocks’ Eyes_.’”
putting his chin on his paws. “And sit down, both of you,” (to the King
glad to help, if it might.
Who snorted like a buffalo—
the right colour, and that goes a long way.”
mind, “There’s another little girl in the garden, somewhere!”
“I’m very brave generally,” he went on in a low voice: “only to-day I
“Only it is so _very_ lonely here!” Alice said in a melancholy voice;
in a severe tone (she was always rather fond of scolding herself),
were?”
all over his face.”
in French when you can’t think of the English for a thing—turn out your
In thy young life’s hereafter—
here and there.
She puzzled over this for some time, but at last a bright thought
The Millennium Fulcrum Edition 1.7
‘The little fishes are in bed.’
edges of the table—and three of them (who looked like kangaroos)
went, they never seemed to pass anything. “I wonder if all the things
you!”
After we’ve brought them out so far,
Alice shook her head.
never put things into people’s hands—that would never do—you must get
Who fret to find our bedtime near.
throw it into the bushes, when a sudden thought seemed to strike him,
into the snow! And you’d have deserved it, you little mischievous
set off.
what he meant, and this time he fell flat on his back, right under the
Of cabbages—and kings—
“Then it would have to be the next day. I suppose you wouldn’t have two
bud!”
“I haven’t tried it yet,” the Knight said, gravely: “so I can’t tell
The sea was wet as wet could be,
“I was coming to that,” the Knight said. “The song really _is_
their heads like extinguishers, and drank all that trickled down their
know, because there never was more than one Queen at a time. Do wake
“No, you oughtn’t: that’s quite another thing! The _song_ is called
the saddle, which was already loaded with bunches of carrots, and
“Not yet,” said the Knight. “But I’ve got a plan for keeping it from
into order. “Come, you look rather better now!” she said, after
small, and her eyes got large and green: and still, as Alice went on
Which is easiest to do,
4. Alice to Q.’s 5th (_shop, river, shop_)
suppose it will at last. But how curiously it twists! It’s more like a
arm-chair, half talking to herself and half asleep, the kitten had been
of each collar, when she was startled by a voice coming from the one
I can hardly hold you! And don’t keep your mouth so wide open! All the
can do two things at once, you know. Let’s consider your age to begin
The rhythm of oar rowing—
outside. I wonder if the snow _loves_ the trees and fields, that it
sharp corner, she came upon two fat little men, so suddenly that she
frightened—for the oars, and the boat, and the river, had vanished all
guess! _I_ couldn’t.”
To dye one’s whiskers green,
“In that case we start fresh,” said Humpty Dumpty, “and it’s my turn to
the names. “I’m not a visitor, and I’m not a servant. There _ought_ to
herself, feeling sure that they must be.
remarked. “Hand it round first, and cut it afterwards.”
“It says ‘Bough-wough!’” cried a Daisy: “that’s why its branches are
No cloud was in the sky:
There were no birds to fly.
great interest as she returned to the tree, and then began slowly
‘If this were only cleared away,’
How it happened, Alice never knew, but exactly as she came to the last
‘It will be better to obey.’
an uncomfortable silence for a minute or two.
_ever_ met—” She never finished the sentence, for at this moment a
“That was mean!” Alice said indignantly. “Then I like the Carpenter
“Crabs, and all sorts of things,” said the Sheep: “plenty of choice,
Come and dine with the Red Queen, the White Queen, and me.’”
fall, you see—But there _was_ the danger of falling _into_ it, to be
The love-gift of a fairy-tale.
herself sitting quietly under a tree—while the Gnat (for that was the
Alice stood looking after it, almost ready to cry with vexation at
“I hope you’ve got your hair well fastened on?” he continued, as they
suppose you’d be?”
“There’s nothing but hay left now,” the Messenger said, peeping into
_very_ strong here. It’s as strong as soup.”
who immediately sat down on the ground, and tried to hide himself under
certain about this, “is the thunder—no, no!” she hastily corrected
eyes to Alice. She thought she had never seen such a strange-looking
Evidently Humpty Dumpty was very angry, though he said nothing for a
“Her Red Majesty’s very kind to mention it,” the White Queen murmured
it! For instance, if the governess wanted to call you to your lessons,
‘Who are you, aged man?’ I said,
‘It was so kind of you to come!
“She’s tired, poor thing!” said the Red Queen. “Smooth her hair—lend
marked “DUM.”
“Why do you wish _I_ had made it?” Alice asked. “It’s a very bad one.”
chair—all but the bit behind the fireplace. Oh! I do so wish I could
for the bonfire—and it wants plenty of sticks, Kitty! Only it got so
“But he was very stiff and proud;
instantly, and stood for some time looking at her with an air of the
And you are very nice!’
Agreed to have a battle;
with—how old are you?”
then through a microscope, and then through an opera-glass. At last he
in the hedges?”
fun would be trying to find the creature that had got my old name!
wood, for really it’s coming on very dark. Do you think it’s going to
didn’t succeed, principally, Alice said, because the kitten wouldn’t
could, for the run was putting her quite out of breath.
said to myself, ‘The only difficulty is with the feet: the _head_ is
nice, you know.”
Alice thought to herself, “Then there’s no use in speaking.” The voices
“I don’t understand you,” said Alice. “It’s dreadfully confusing!”
“I sent to them again to say
“Why, I beat you all round the town, you chicken!” the Lion replied
Alice felt even more indignant at this suggestion. “I mean,” she said,
out so many things.”
The Red Queen shook her head, “You may call it ‘nonsense’ if you like,”
“Is that all?” Alice timidly asked.
great feet. “You let _it_ alone,” he panted out, as he hobbled back to
an argument.
“TO THE HOUSE OF TWEEDLEDEE.”
as she could, she could make nothing more of it: she was in a little
tear his hair. “It’s spoilt, of course!” Here he looked at Tweedledee,
I wonder I never thought of that before—But I can’t stay there long.
Just then the door opened a little way, and a creature with a long beak
go and see the bonfire to-morrow.” Here Alice wound two or three turns
the umbrella.
THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS
3. W. Q. to Q.B.’s 5th (_becomes sheep_)
“that makes all the difference.”
had darted away at full speed.
The Walrus and the Carpenter
The King was evidently very uncomfortable at having to sit down between
Humpty Dumpty relented.
dust him a little, he was so covered with ashes.
At this moment the Messenger arrived: he was far too much out of breath
Or set limed twigs for crabs;
“What _is_ the matter?” she said, as soon as there was a chance of
it _ever_ happened before, that any one had to take care of two Queens
move along with us?” thought poor puzzled Alice. And the Queen seemed
“Ah, you should see “em come round me of a Saturday night,” Humpty
“Make a remark,” said the Red Queen: “it’s ridiculous to leave all the
“I think I’ll go and meet her,” said Alice, for, though the flowers
to say ‘How d’ye do?’ and shake hands!” And here the two brothers gave
seem to have got beyond that, somehow!”
and was always in the shelf next above the one she was looking at. “And
Alice thought it would not be civil to say “No,” though it wasn’t at
on—with the man in it, too.”
Gnat inquired.
Alice couldn’t guess. It was just like a conjuring-trick, she thought.
after next!” and shut the door again with a bang.
oyster-shells in there—so you see he’s very hungry and thirsty. How are
“And what did _Dinah_ turn to, I wonder?” she prattled on, as she
impossible things.”
Majesty will only tell me the right way to begin, I’ll do it as well as
their way, you know.”
“Then I ought to have said ‘That’s what the _song_ is called’?” Alice
balances very badly_”) “That’s not a memorandum of _your_ feelings!”
just now, as I said, she was hard at work on the white kitten, which
sevot yhtils eht dna, gillirb sawT’
“I know _that_!” Alice cried eagerly. “You take some flour—”
and she could hardly help saying them out loud:—
CHAPTER XII.
he had a queer-shaped little deal box fastened across his shoulder,
Kitty. Let’s pretend the glass has got all soft like gauze, so that we
Humpty Dumpty had a great fall.
“None to speak of,” the Knight said, as if he didn’t mind breaking two
Kitten, which was still patiently undergoing its toilet, “when _will_
it for yourself.” And so saying, she went off to the other end of the
hills, in comparison with which you’d call that a valley.”
a voice of delight, “and, dear me! you’re a human child!” A sudden look
his voice “They’re at it again!”
“I’ll tell you how I came to think of it,” said the Knight. “You see, I
Alice considered a little. “I like birthday presents best,” she said at
Alice turned round, ready to find fault with anybody. “Where’s the
Like water through a sieve.
“And a long way beyond it on each side,” Alice added.
I sing this song for your delight—
A melancholy maiden!
_seems_ to be done right—though I haven’t time to look it over
me, much easier than that, by—Tweedledee, I think it was.”
worsted to clap her hands. “And I do so _wish_ it was true! I’m sure
and I’ve pinned it there, but there’s no pleasing it!”
“Yes, to be sure,” said the King: “and the best of the joke is, that
the bag.
drink—But oh, Kitty! now we come to the passage. You can just see a
“I see nobody on the road,” said Alice.
Hatta. I must have _two_, you know—to come and go. One to come, and one
gunpowder and sealing-wax. And here I must leave you.” They had just
being able to see a little further. “Principal rivers—there _are_ none.
tell me what language ‘fiddle-de-dee’ is, I’ll tell you the French for
in? I shouldn’t like to lose it at all—because they’d have to give me
“Can’t you?” the Queen said in a pitying tone. “Try again: draw a long
eyes grew large and yellow all in a moment, as he pointed with a
of sugar.”
“I’m afraid he’ll catch cold with lying on the damp grass,” said Alice,
Some gave them plum-cake and drummed them out of town.”
White Queen sitting on the edge of the shovel—and here are two castles
*      *      *      *      *      *      *
“It wouldn’t look nice,” Alice objected. But Humpty Dumpty only shut
fast in the water and _wouldn’t_ come out again (so Alice explained it
herself, as she stood watching him. “There he goes! Right on his head
I filled the kettle at the pump.
Dumpty began again. “They’ve a temper, some of them—particularly verbs,
real treat. All the time you’re eating your breakfast, I’ll repeat ‘The
tone. “It’s my own invention—to keep clothes and sandwiches in. You see
They placed themselves close to where Hatta, the other messenger, was
snoring loud.
thorny kind.”
“So _much_ obliged!” added Tweedledee. “You like poetry?”
Alice said, as she held out her hand and tried to stroke it; but it
‘Do you admire the view?
“Don’t make excuses,” said the Guard: “you should have bought one from
like a live mop.”
cheerfully as she could. “At any rate I’d better be getting out of the
you’ll believe in me, I’ll believe in you. Is that a bargain?”
deepest disgust.
things have no names. I wonder what’ll become of _my_ name when I go
Swept it for half a year,
there’s a dear!” And Alice got the Red Queen off the table, and set it
“That’s the way it’s done,” the Queen said with great decision: “nobody
Hatta’s neck.
last: “a hill _can’t_ be a valley, you know. That would be nonsense—”
else—”
see it or not!”
For a minute or two Alice stood silent, watching him. Suddenly she
This sounded a very good reason, and Alice was quite pleased to know
and said in a loud voice, “She ought to know her way to the
Alice thought she saw a way out of the difficulty this time. “If you’ll
of the worsted round the kitten’s neck, just to see how it would look:
triumphantly.
No birds were flying over head—
“It’s a poor sort of memory that only works backwards,” the Queen
can’t tell _you_.)
sort of thing in his dream, what are _you_, I should like to know?”
“I never ask advice about growing,” Alice said indignantly.
a talk with a real Queen.
However, the egg only got larger and larger, and more and more human:
ends of my whiskers!”
noticed, that last time you picked me up, that I was looking rather
herself, “the next time I’m a little late for dinner.”
Walrus and the Carpenter’ to you; and then you can make believe it’s
But the Red Queen looked sulky, and growled “Pudding—Alice;
being blown away!”
very much pleased. “I meant by ‘impenetrability’ that we’ve had enough
you know, I always thought Unicorns were fabulous monsters, too! I
his feet.”
see through the glass—that’s just the same as our drawing room, only
of a song,” thought Alice), “Don’t keep him waiting, child! Why, his
poor thing down by its ear with one paw, and then with the other paw
The shop seemed to be full of all manner of curious things—but the
Rule seems to be, that if one Knight hits the other, he knocks him off
very provoking!” she said, in reply to the Lion (she was getting quite
Your Honour’s noble health.’
so far—and for the song—I liked it very much.”
“Do you call _that_ a whisper?” cried the poor King, jumping up and
pointing the same way, one marked “TO TWEEDLEDUM’S HOUSE” and the other
wasting time.”
The brooch had come undone as she spoke, and a sudden gust of wind blew
“Oh, things that happened the week after next,” the Queen replied in a
‘No hurry!’ said the Carpenter.
“O Tiger-lily,” said Alice, addressing herself to one that was waving
“Feather!” cried the Sheep, as she took up another pair of needles.
that!”
to them—and what quantities of honey they must make! I think I’ll go
sell them?”
plan of my own invention. You may try it if you like.”
It shall not touch with breath of bale
carriage-full of passengers altogether), and, as the rule seemed to be
“Put your hand down, and feel the ground,” said the Tiger-lily. “Then
Contrariwise.”
_very_ dry.
‘A loaf of bread,’ the Walrus said,
The Carpenter said nothing but
out her purse.
minute or two. When he _did_ speak again, it was in a deep growl.
added, as a sudden thought struck her, “I’ll follow it up to the very
would try the plan, this time, of walking in the opposite direction.
was bustling about among the flowers, poking its proboscis into them,
The Lion looked at Alice wearily. “Are you animal—vegetable—or
can’t remember here.”
name. Principal towns—why, what _are_ those creatures, making honey
Alice laid her hand upon his arm, and said in a soothing tone, “You
Dreaming as the days go by,
I’ll just call and say ‘how d’you do?’ and ask them the way out of the
Alice said, as she gently put it right for her; “and, dear me, what a
‘Before we have our chat;
will come undone directly. Oh, oh!” As she said the words the brooch
_my_ notion of the thing, at all.”
cold, and it snowed so, they had to leave off. Never mind, Kitty, we’ll
(“And they _did_ push so!” she said afterwards, when she was telling
“I don’t think they’ll fight any more to-day,” the King said to Hatta:
really a _sheep_ that was sitting on the other side of the counter? Rub
wither to hear the way they go on!”
it: it looked much darker than the last wood, and Alice felt a _little_
did it ask you?”
“What a beautiful belt you’ve got on!” Alice suddenly remarked.
the umbrella, with only his head out: and there he lay, opening and
whether the paint would come off; then he looked at Alice.
here she was, half a head taller than Alice herself!
sleepy, too.” In another moment both Queens were fast asleep, and
eating.”
White Pawn (Alice) to play, and win in eleven moves.
“Come and look at him!” the brothers cried, and they each took one of
flower-beds dotted about it here and there. “Oh, how glad I am to get
with both her hands. “Something’s going to happen!”
shall have to go back through the Looking-glass, before I’ve seen what
heard of such a thing!”
As if his mouth were full of dough,
“He can’t do that,” said the King, “or else he’d have been here first.
Shall we be trotting home again?’
And whether pigs have wings.’
However, there was the great dish still lying at her feet, on which she
“Then it would die, of course.”
‘Next, the fish must be bought.’
took no notice of the question: it was quite clear that he could
some were animals, some birds, and there were even a few flowers among
_you_ call yourself?” she said timidly. “I think that might help a
“I know it’s very ignorant of me,” Alice said, in so humble a tone that
_are_ talking!”
that hears me sing it—either it brings the _tears_ into their eyes, or
“Nohow. And thank you _very_ much for asking,” said Tweedledum.
Not that Alice had any idea of doing _that_. She felt as if she would
to move.
(_As arranged before commencement of game._)
Let the Looking-Glass creatures, whatever they be,
(They had had quite enough of the subject of age, she thought: and if
thousand pounds a puff!”
“What did he want?” said the Red Queen.
clever!”
really was wondering when you’d speak! Said I to myself, ‘Her face has
Tweedledum spread a large umbrella over himself and his brother, and
The vorpal blade went snicker-snack!
repeat them—for fear of your forgetting them. At the end of _four_, I
“Look on the branch above your head,” said the Gnat, “and there you’ll
She looked at the Queen, who seemed to have suddenly wrapped herself up
Take pen and ink, and write it down.”
Ever drifting down the stream—
toes as you walk—and remember who you are!” She did not wait for Alice
“Your majesty shouldn’t purr so loud,” Alice said, rubbing her eyes,
“I wish the monstrous crow would come!” thought Alice.
Alice was just beginning to say “There’s a mistake somewhere—,” when
The magic words shall hold thee fast:
that day.
end. “The egg seems to get further away the more I walk towards it. Let
been reduced at last to say, “Well, _you_ can be one of them then, and
“There’s the tree in the middle,” said the Rose: “what else is it good
with—with—with Ham-sandwiches and Hay. His name is Haigha, and he
“Nobody said you did,” said the Red Queen. “I said you couldn’t if you
Queen.
wouldn’t have to go, you know.”
choosing to notice the Rose’s last remark.
They stood so still that she quite forgot they were alive, and she was
Look up, speak nicely, and don’t twiddle your fingers all the time.”
“_Must_ a name mean something?” Alice asked doubtfully.
Alice felt that in that case she really _ought_ to listen to it, so she
cooked! In fact, I don’t believe that pudding ever _will_ be cooked!
hung round his neck, and handed a sandwich to the King, who devoured it
“I beg your pardon?” said Alice.
down the path, determined to keep straight on till she got to the hill.
left off dancing as suddenly as they had begun: the music stopped at
“Fan her head!” the Red Queen anxiously interrupted. “She’ll be
thought Alice.) “So here’s a question for you. How old did you say you
“I’m sure I’m very sorry,” was all Alice could say; for the words of
*      *      *      *      *      *      *
“I wish _I_ could manage to be glad!” the Queen said. “Only I never can
ran quickly into the wood (“and she _can_ run very fast!” thought
It would have been all the better, as it seemed to Alice, if she had
And the mome raths outgrabe.
The Knight shook his head. “It was all kinds of fastness with me, I can
Here the Red Queen began again. “Can you answer useful questions?” she
can be the White Queen’s Pawn, if you like, as Lily’s too young to
“That’s the effect of living backwards,” the Queen said kindly: “it
your face this morning. Now you can’t deny it, Kitty: I heard you!
return-ticket every time the train stops.”
“I won’t be introduced to the pudding, please,” Alice said rather
old song:—
“Now the cleverest thing of the sort that I ever did,” he went on after
“It’s no use talking about it,” Alice said, looking up at the house and
you to Alice’s dinner-party this afternoon.”
“Why, I’ve done all the screaming already,” said the Queen. “What would
weeds (which made the oars stick fast in the water, worse then ever),
Queen, for he was covered with ashes from head to foot.
look all round me first, if I might.”
Everything was happening so oddly that she didn’t feel a bit surprised
little box out of her pocket. “Have a biscuit?”
companion only smiled pleasantly, and said, “That’s easily managed. You
steam-engine in the wood near them, though she feared it was more
hands ready to catch him, for she was every moment expecting him to
and addressing the kitten, respectfully, yet with some severity. “You
like it!”
‘I sometimes dig for buttered rolls,
“That’s a good long way. Did you go by the old bridge, or the
and set her on the table by the side of her noisy little daughter.
And he was very proud and stiff;
There was not a moment to be lost. Already several of the guests were
ways about here belong to _me_—but why did you come out here at all?”
“You will, though,” the Queen said, “if you don’t make a memorandum of
Alice was puzzled. “In _our_ country,” she remarked, “there’s only one
saddle,” said Alice.
in the shape of a trumpet, and stooping so as to get close to the
up, you heavy things!” she went on in an impatient tone; but there was
8. R. Q. to K.’s sq. (_examination_)
But even this plan failed: the “thing” went through the ceiling as
He chortled in his joy.
The little fishes of the sea,
glancing at him as he passed.
shouting together, till the air seemed quite full of little shrill
like yours, you might be any shape, almost.”
had been having its face washed by the old cat for the last quarter of
The King was saying, “I assure, you my dear, I turned cold to the very
‘_Here we go round the mulberry bush_.’ I don’t know when I began it,
“How _can_ she knit with so many?” the puzzled child thought to
“Is it really?” said Alice, quite pleased to find that she _had_ chosen
I sell them unto men,’ he said,
two—several.”
“I know what _you’d_ like!” the Queen said good-naturedly, taking a
added, as she smoothed his hair, and set him upon the table near the
Another Rule of Battle, that Alice had not noticed, seemed to be that
little shudder, “She _says_ she only said ‘if’—”
CHAPTER V.
past the King, so violently that she knocked him over among the
“I say, this isn’t fair!” cried the Unicorn, as Alice sat with the
“Tickets, please!” said the Guard, putting his head in at the window.
looking from one Queen to the other.
Then came another of those melancholy little sighs, and this time the
forest—however, one of the Knights will show you the way—and in the
said. “Put on the joint!” And the waiters set a leg of mutton before
Here Alice ventured to interrupt him. “If it’s _very_ long,” she said,
old room—and there’d be an end of all my adventures!”
that’s some comfort!” she said to herself. In another moment she felt
“That’s right!” said the Tiger-lily. “The daisies are worst of all.
Among the heather bright,
clearly that it was HUMPTY DUMPTY himself. “It can’t be anybody else!”
remarked, “of course you’d miss your lessons. That’s a joke. I wish
you’re only a sort of thing in his dream!”
“She’s coming!” cried the Larkspur. “I hear her footstep, thump, thump,
“I’m afraid you’ve not had much practice in riding,” she ventured to
It was a golden crown.
it saves time.”
Where the noise came from, she couldn’t make out: the air seemed full
in a calmer tone. “That’s what you call a History of England, that is.
honour of having been a Red Queen.”
“And how exactly like an egg he is!” she said aloud, standing with her
oh!”
that I don’t intend—”
sixty-four days when you might get un-birthday presents—”
it’s amazing how good-tempered she is! Pat her on the head, and see how
I’ve had to ask you twice!’
So Alice hunted among the chessmen on the table till she had found the
The middle of the night.
“Certainly,” said Alice.
“I’m not offended,” said Humpty Dumpty.
“But it certainly _was_ funny,” (Alice said afterwards, when she was
“But the tune _isn’t_ his own invention,” she said to herself: “it’s
“I was thinking,” Alice said very politely, “which is the best way out
I’ll try and tell you what I mean.”
“Nearly there!” the Queen repeated. “Why, we passed it ten minutes ago!
out—or the bees keep the mice out, I don’t know which.”
“Were you happy in prison, dear child?” said Haigha.
‘Then you must wake them up again.’
“That would never do, I’m sure,” said Alice: “the governess would never
“The question is,” said Humpty Dumpty, “which is to be master—that’s
brightened up. “Look, look!” she cried, pointing eagerly. “There’s the
“I don’t _quite_ know yet,” Alice said, very gently. “I should like to
this’—however, we’ll suppose it said—the Seventh Square is all
“He lives on the Hill,” the King remarked simply, without the least
under this tree the whole time! Everything’s just as it was!”
Of course the first thing to do was to make a grand survey of the
interested.
“She’s in that state of mind,” said the White Queen, “that she wants to
head! I’m afraid it would come off!”
The fishes answered with a grin,
“He ate more than the Carpenter, though,” said Tweedledee. “You see he
So she went on, wondering more and more at every step, as everything
WHITE                        RED.
song to comfort you.”
Man_.’”
“that one can’t help growing older.”
across the other, like fiddles and fiddle-sticks.
“To be sure I do.” said Alice.
Tweedledum.    Daisy.        Daisy.      Lion.
the—into _what_?” she went on, rather surprised at not being able to
The Lion and the Unicorn
Alice ventured to remark.
Queen so soon—and I’ll tell you what it is, your majesty,” she went on
down its cheeks.
On which the Messenger, to Alice’s great amusement, opened a bag that
To what the old man said,
pleased to find that there was a real one, blazing away as brightly as
herself, as she lifted it off, and set it on her lap to make out what
And more, and more, and more—
thump, along the gravel-walk!”
That’s just like the advertisements, you know, when people lose
to make out exactly what it had on it, that particular shelf was always
the six little brooks.
about. I think it’s short for ‘from home’—meaning that they’d lost
afterwards), and she was not even surprised to hear music playing: it
“While you’re refreshing yourself,” said the Queen, “I’ll just take the
“Is there generally?” Alice asked in an astonished tone.
“But ‘glory’ doesn’t mean ‘a nice knock-down argument,’” Alice
So saying, he stopped his horse and let the reins fall on its neck:
Shaking
look whether there was a fire in the fireplace, and she was quite
walking down the row.
serious question, my dear, and you should _not_ go on licking your paw
instead. “It’s rather a tight fit, you see,” he said, as they got it in
364
away, and drank some more tea.
knife in her hand, very much puzzled how to begin. “The Monster has
“She’s _my_ prisoner, you know!” the Red Knight said at last.
W. Knight.     Hatta.        Frog.       R. Knight.
“Where does she wear the thorns?” Alice asked with some curiosity.
“As to fishes,” she said, very slowly and solemnly, putting her mouth
The billows smooth and bright—
on waving about, she spoke again, in a timid voice—almost in a whisper.
lying down in the dishes, and the soup ladle was walking up the table
“I should like to buy an egg, please,” she said timidly. “How do you
Divide a loaf by a knife—what’s the answer to that?”
while he got out a dish and carving-knife. How they all came out of it
attitudes he goes into!” (For the messenger kept skipping up and down,
now.) “At least,” she corrected herself on second thoughts, “a
thunderstorm coming on. “What a thick black cloud that is!” she said.
Subtraction? Take nine from eight.”
more as if she were talking to herself. “He came to the door with a
hand, and being dusted: he was far too much astonished to cry out, but
old clothes than anything else, by the time they’re ready!” she said to
her cheeks.
you tidy, so you couldn’t. I was watching the boys getting in sticks
looked so solemn and grand that Alice could hardly help laughing. “_If_
“It always happens,” said the Gnat.
‘_A-sitting On A Gate_’: and the tune’s my own invention.”
So Alice picked him up very gently, and lifted him across more slowly
dreaming about?”
mouth_—to—to—”
“That’s three faults, Kitty, and you’ve not been punished for any of
it alive?”
Though envious years would say ‘forget.’
‘your Majesty.’”
The Carpenter said nothing but
Or if I drop upon my toe
The White Queen laughed with delight, and stroked Alice’s cheek. Then
“Beware the Jabberwock, my son!
beginning to say, when suddenly the needles turned into oars in her
opposite direction, and he didn’t take the least notice of her, she
they’re the proudest—adjectives you can do anything with, but not
All hopping through the frothy waves,
I weep, for it reminds me so,
Principal mountains—I’m on the only one, but I don’t think it’s got any
“If I wasn’t real,” Alice said—half-laughing through her tears, it all
And hundreds of voices joined in the chorus:
completely bewildered.
“And darker,” said Tweedledee.
At this moment the Unicorn sauntered by them, with his hands in his
lizards—and they’re something like corkscrews.”
“Snowdrop, my pet!” she went on, looking over her shoulder at the White
a horse’s head), and put it on.
I cried, ‘Come, tell me how you live!’
Alice looked on with great interest as the King took an enormous
Did gyre and gimble in the wabe;
among the heap of rushes.
“Isn’t he a _lovely_ sight?” said Tweedledum.
unfinished. “Oh, oh, oh!” shouted the Queen, shaking her hand about as
“And ‘_the wabe_’ is the grass-plot round a sun-dial, I suppose?” said
“I don’t know what you mean by _your_ way,” said the Queen: “all the
came. Or—let me see—suppose each punishment was to be going without a
“Plenty of practice!” he went on repeating, all the time that Alice was
oysters, dear!
land there is worth a thousand pounds an inch!”
wood. If I could only get to the Eighth Square before it gets dark!” So
tumbled off his horse just as the Red Knight had done: then he got on
song, he began.
“When do you expect to do it?” Alice asked, feeling very much inclined
as she bent over the side of the boat, with just the ends of her
“It’s _very_ provoking,” Humpty Dumpty said after a long silence,
under the chin, and, in spite of a series of little shrieks of “Oh, oh,
surprise, they all _thought_ in chorus (I hope you understand what
All this was lost on Alice, who was still looking intently along the
the two Messengers, either. They’re both gone to the town. Just look
off his head, he trembled so much.
What mattered it to her just then that the rushes had begun to fade,
last. “There ought to be some men moving about somewhere—and so there
suggested: “or some sal-volatile.”
ring—the—_which_ bell must I ring?” she went on, very much puzzled by
“Of course it is. It’s called ‘_wabe_,’ you know, because it goes a
Are very good indeed—
“Hush-a-by lady, in Alice’s lap!
to the Red Queen.
nervous, and his voice quite quivered. “All round the town?” he said.
“Nobody,” said the Messenger.
was sent in,” Haigha whispered to Alice: “and they only give them
really wanted to know was, whether it could sting or not, but she
about here?”
knots and tangles, with the kitten running after its own tail in the
seems to be that they hold their clubs with their arms, as if they were
*      *      *      *      *      *
moment, and found herself walking in at the front-door again.
herself, as she arranged a bolster round the neck of Tweedledee, “to
“Imperial fiddlestick!” said the King, rubbing his nose, which had been
Eighth Square at last!” she cried as she bounded across,
said the Rose. “I wonder how you do it—” (“You’re always wondering,”
“And there’s the Dragon-fly.”
perplexity, as first one round head, and then the other, rolled down
This sounded very hopeful, so Alice repeated the first verse:
ticket-office, even if she doesn’t know her alphabet!”
“No, but I meant—please, may we wait and pick some?” Alice pleaded. “If
Looking-glass House! I’m sure it’s got, oh! such beautiful things in
another open field, and here the Fawn gave a sudden bound into the air,
Alice couldn’t see who was sitting beyond the Beetle, but a hoarse
winter: you never _can_ tell, you know, unless our fire smokes, and
no answer but a gentle snoring.
the thought that there was nobody to see her, “and if I really am a
“Well, we must fight for her, then,” said the Red Knight, as he took up
“I’m sure I didn’t mean—” Alice was beginning, but the Red Queen
CHAPTER I.
the engine-driver.” And once more the chorus of voices went on with
“I had to kick him, of course,” the Knight said, very seriously. “And
“What does it live on?” Alice asked, with great curiosity.
“I declare it’s marked out just like a large chessboard!” Alice said at
“just as if it was a regular bee,” thought Alice.
this one is the most provoking of all—but I’ll tell you what—” she
things.”
This was the poem that Alice read.
her—”
Alice didn’t dare to argue the point, but went on: “—and I thought I’d
this railway journey at all—I was in a wood just now—and I wish I could
“Do you see _that_?” he said, in a voice choking with passion, and his
‘I doubt it,’ said the Carpenter,
Life, what is it but a dream?
up in the dish and made a little bow to Alice; and Alice returned the
And sell them in the street.
“Of course I don’t think so! Why, if ever I _did_ fall off—which
“He’s dreaming now,” said Tweedledee: “and what do you think he’s
The White Queen smiled feebly, and said “And I invite _you_.”
Completed my design
quite well in time.”
“Then two are cheaper than one?” Alice said in a surprised tone, taking
“The sun was shining on the sea,
making herself heard. “Have you pricked your finger?”
“I should think throwing cold water over you would be better,” Alice
5. W. Q. to Q. B.’s 8th (_flying from R. Kt._)
That summer evening, long ago,
6. Alice to Q.’s 7th (_forest_)
is Haigha.” (He pronounced it so as to rhyme with “mayor.”)
“Well, ‘_slithy_’ means ‘lithe and slimy.’ ‘Lithe’ is the same as
“But if everybody obeyed that rule,” said Alice, who was always ready
“Oh, much better!” cried the Queen, her voice rising to a squeak as she
“That last line is much too long for the poetry,” she added, almost out
scrambling wildly up the side of the fender.
doesn’t know a cravat from a belt!”
laughed scornfully, and went on with her knitting.
Hatta looked round once more, and this time a tear or two trickled down
When summer suns were glowing—
pudding-courses in one dinner?”
till you know no more what’s going on in the world, than if you were a
triumphantly. “And if he left off dreaming about you, where do you
Getting a little fatter.
Lion and Unicorn were fighting. They were in such a cloud of dust, that
“I only wanted to see what the garden was like, your Majesty—”
would never do to say ‘How d’ye do?’ _now_,” she said to herself: “we
Looking-Glass, this was the one that she always remembered most
front; and whenever it went on again (which it generally did rather
“Would you tell me, please,” said Alice “what that means?”
looking slyly up at the crown, which the poor King was nearly shaking
getting him on his feet again. “Plenty of practice!”
the same moment.
can get through. Why, it’s turning into a sort of mist now, I declare!
think of excusing me lessons for that. If she couldn’t remember my
“Yes, it’s a very good bee-hive,” the Knight said in a discontented
white.
up one in the other room.
A simple chime, that served to time
forgetting that the King couldn’t hear her. “You make me laugh so that
“And then ‘_mome raths_’?” said Alice. “I’m afraid I’m giving you a
“Do you know what to-morrow is, Kitty?” Alice began. “You’d have
“I shouldn’t have minded it so much,” said Tweedledum, “if it hadn’t
to the Messenger for some more hay.
And shook his heavy head—
a-dressing myself for the last two hours.”
yet.”
again!” she said as cheerfully as she could.
dressed in white paper), “ought to know which way she’s going, even if
the Queen’s broad good-natured face grinning at her for a moment over
said.
ebaw eht ni elbmig dna eryg diD
“No, thank you,” said Alice: “one’s _quite_ enough!”
summer comes again.’ And when they wake up in the summer, Kitty, they
All eager for the treat:
country she was going to travel through. “It’s something very like
to himself, as he opened his memorandum-book. “Do you spell ‘creature’
did so. “_Now_ cut it up,” said the Lion, as she returned to her place
his armour in a blaze of light that quite dazzled her—the horse quietly
By this time it was getting light. “The crow must have flown away, I
corkscrew than a path! Well, _this_ turn goes to the hill, I
“But oh!” thought Alice, suddenly jumping up, “if I don’t make haste I
The moon was shining sulkily,
“Your Majesty must excuse her,” the Red Queen said to Alice, taking one
She was standing before an arched doorway over which were the words
“Very much indeed,” Alice said politely.
“Fiddle-de-dee’s not English,” Alice replied gravely.
Waking
than the foot-soldiers: but even _they_ stumbled now and then; and it
great hands, “_I_ can repeat poetry as well as other folk, if it comes
“Speak, can’t you!” Haigha cried impatiently. But Hatta only munched
of the blows.
“I don’t know what you mean,” she said.
And this was odd, because, you know,
before she could stop herself.
your handkerchief when I get to that turn in the road? I think it’ll
“Does—the one—that wins—get the crown?” she asked, as well as she
“Don’t stand there chattering to yourself like that,” Humpty Dumpty
tips of her fingers on the hand-rail, and floated gently down without
belonging to another person’s dream,” she went on in a rather
“Yes, a little—but not on land—and not with needles—” Alice was
a sugar loaf. When I used to wear it, if I fell off the horse, it
The White Queen gave a deep sigh, and laid her head on Alice’s
as sensible as a dictionary!”
day before—all because Alice had begun with “Let’s pretend we’re kings
But never a word he said:
“Ye-es, pretty well—_some_ poetry,” Alice said doubtfully. “Would you
‘O Oysters,’ said the Carpenter.
give orders, so, as an experiment, she called out “Waiter! Bring back
then smoke comes up in that room too—but that may be only pretence,
as we’ve been doing.”
when his eye happened to fall upon Alice: he turned round rather
rather go without them than eat them!
further, “to stop a minute—just to get—one’s breath again?”
“How is it you can all talk so nicely?” Alice said, hoping to get it
for fear of frightening them), “and there are the White King and the
And thence they make a stuff they call
plenty of hard words there. ‘_Brillig_’ means four o’clock in the
from the White King and Queen. There now!”
cheeks and dripping hair and hands, she scrambled back into her place,
Alice among the rest.
“Oh, that’s the name of the song, is it?” Alice said, trying to feel
likely to be a wild beast. “Are there any lions or tigers about here?”
Haigha took a large cake out of the bag, and gave it to Alice to hold,
it tickled her ear very much, and quite took off her thoughts from the
Then a very gentle voice in the distance said, “She must be labelled
“Of course you agree to have a battle?” Tweedledum said in a calmer
Contents
out—bang!—just like a candle!”
odd to find trees growing here! And actually here’s a little brook!
“Why all round her head, of course,” the Rose replied. “I was wondering
For some of us are out of breath,
whole set of fire-irons falling into the fender! And how quiet the
‘You’ve had a pleasant run!
Or madly squeeze a right-hand foot
and at the thought of her loneliness two large tears came rolling down
“I know they’re talking nonsense,” Alice thought to herself: “and it’s
shake you into a kitten, that I will!”
tables!”
_like_ to be a Queen, best.”
“Do you know, I’ve had such a quantity of poetry repeated to me
a white quilt; and perhaps it says, ‘Go to sleep, darlings, till the
“The man that drives the engine. Why, the smoke alone is worth a
“Ditto” said Tweedledum.
her hair about so.
That is easy: a baby, I think, could have caught it.
in a tone of great contempt.
Who seemed distracted with his woe,
looking round. “That wood’s full of them.”
say nothing at all. Language is worth a thousand pounds a word!”
forest. “It won’t take long to see him _off_, I expect,” Alice said to
from falling over on the other side.
(“But it wouldn’t look at it,” she said, when she was explaining the
“Indeed I did,” said Alice: “you’ve said it very often—and very loud.
Alice began: and she really _did_ rise as she spoke, several inches;
to herself.
about the Lion and the Unicorn and those queer Anglo-Saxon Messengers.
Red Queen, and White Queen, and Alice, and all!
room to see if she could find any water to throw over him. However, she
hardly missed them.
“there’s nothing to cry about.”
“Blew—me—up,” panted the Queen, who was still a little out of breath.
careless tone. “For instance, now,” she went on, sticking a large piece
“Now then! Show your ticket, child!” the Guard went on, looking angrily
,sevogorob eht erew ysmim llA
Mix sand with the cider, and wool with the wine—
“The Lion and the Unicorn were fighting for the crown:
asleep at once! No, not in all the History of England—it couldn’t, you
the fourth or fifth tumble he reached the turn, and then she waved her
She caught the shawl as she spoke, and looked about for the owner: in
He did his very best to make
“Here are the Red King and the Red Queen,” Alice said (in a whisper,
elephant—as Alice soon found out, though the idea quite took her breath
lighting up his gentle foolish face, as if he enjoyed the music of his
CHAPTER VI.
prisoner. I want to be a Queen.”
“when you’re only one of the things in his dream. You know very well
interest, clasping his arms round the horse’s neck as he spoke, just in
it as heartily as she could. They went on a little way in silence after
seemed to come from the tree under which they were dancing, and it was
One, two! One, two! And through and through
mean to do next, as I suppose you don’t mean to stop here all the rest
shut out the dreadful uproar.
exclaimed at last. “But he’s coming very slowly—and what curious
“I can’t believe _that_!” said Alice.
All mimsy were the borogoves,
came up panting.
Dinah, you know you ought!” she added, looking reproachfully at the old
CHAPTER I. Looking-Glass house
I thought you would.”
went on. “Much be-etter! Be-etter! Be-e-e-etter! Be-e-ehh!” The last
But the gentleman dressed in white paper leaned forwards and whispered
“You will observe the Rules of Battle, of course?” the White Knight
A very heavy weight,
Alice, who looked at it rather anxiously, as she had never had to carve
that at last they seemed to skim through the air, hardly touching the
the sooner we begin it, the better.”
“How am _I_ to stop it?” said the Sheep. “If you leave off rowing,
Tuesday—I mean one of the last set of Tuesdays, you know.”
next the fire seemed to be all alive, and the very clock on the
it _must_ have been the Red Queen.”)
And burbled as it came!
“Of course they answer to their names?” the Gnat remarked carelessly.
seriously. Because, when we were playing just now, you watched just as
hill: “and now for the last brook, and to be a Queen! How grand it
they always fell on their heads, and the battle ended with their both
“they’re not sensible, and they put me out.”
quick. It’s getting as dark as it can.”
“When I fasten my shawl again,” the poor Queen groaned out: “the brooch
“I should win easy,” said the Lion.
many different things.”
encourage me, you see.”
generally did this on the side on which Alice was walking, she soon
be done right—” he began.
“It can talk,” said Haigha, solemnly.
some eggs are very pretty, you know” she added, hoping to turn her
the Queen’s shawl across a little brook. The Queen spread out her arms
him, and at last he panted out, “My dear! I really _must_ get a thinner
“And _I’ve_ got a toothache!” said Tweedledee, who had overheard the
because it hangs _down_—things never fall _upwards_, you know. It’s a
“There’s one other flower in the garden that can move about like you,”
she turned over the leaves, to find some part that she could read,
as she stepped under the trees, “after being so hot, to get into
standing watching the fight, with a cup of tea in one hand and a piece
“So do I,” the White Queen whispered: “we’ll often say it over
“Well, what _is_ the song, then?” said Alice, who was by this time
“And as for _you_,” she went on, turning fiercely upon the Red Queen,
his eyes and his mouth went on getting larger and larger, and rounder
it could possibly be.
wait for an answer, but went on. “At the end of _three_ yards I shall
By Lewis Carroll
“Then fill up the glasses as quick as you can,
_little_ ashamed of fighting for such a trifle.
Lingering in the golden gleam—
“When _I_ use a word,” Humpty Dumpty said in rather a scornful tone,
‘Take the dish-cover up!’
talking to.”
watching anxiously for the next tumble.
same size as the people, and quite seemed to fill the carriage.
Were walking close at hand;
they really were to take turns in choosing subjects, it was her turn
“go and order the drums to begin.” And Hatta went bounding away like a
“In most gardens,” the Tiger-lily said, “they make the beds too soft—so
again. “I’m a great hand at inventing things. Now, I daresay you
“Wrong!” Humpty Dumpty exclaimed triumphantly. “You never said a word
used to being called “the Monster”). “I’ve cut several slices already,
“What volcano?” said the King, looking up anxiously into the fire, as
And when I found the door was shut,
found herself face to face with the Red Queen, and full in sight of the
“Only for faults,” said Alice.
with both arms stretched out wide, as if she were flying, and Alice
“I’d rather not try, please!” said Alice. “I’m quite content to stay
pleased she’ll be!” But this was more than Alice had courage to do.
cutting up that cake!”
anything in all her life—the way those two bustled about—and the
“What sort of things do _you_ remember best?” Alice ventured to ask.
Alice made a short calculation, and said “Seven years and six months.”
“Oh, please! There are some scented rushes!” Alice cried in a sudden
silvery mist.
“And what does _it_ live on?”
“Feather! Feather!” the Sheep cried again, taking more needles. “You’ll
and yards and yards of it got unwound again.
that they should all speak in turn, _he_ went on with “She’ll have to
word ended in a long bleat, so like a sheep that Alice quite started.
recovered her breath a little, she called out to the White King, who
“If you think we’re wax-works,” he said, “you ought to pay, you know.
upside-down, and with the lid hanging open. Alice looked at it with
till at last she said, “Why, you’ll be hours and hours getting to the
be waking him, I’m afraid, if you make so much noise.”
Or coin of silvery shine
thing afterwards to her sister: “it turned away its head, and pretended
however, she managed to shake him out of it at last.
Kitty, dear, let’s pretend—” And here I wish I could tell you half the
they’d give you milk in there? Perhaps Looking-glass milk isn’t good to
“Living backwards!” Alice repeated in great astonishment. “I never
“Didn’t you hear me say ‘Feather’?” the Sheep cried angrily, taking up
the Knight—the setting sun gleaming through his hair, and shining on
before, but none of the flowers could talk.”
_me_—and I don’t care for jam.”
not to see it: but it looked a _little_ ashamed of itself, so I think
being glad whenever you like!”
“What’s the use of their having names,” the Gnat said, “if they won’t
while she said this, though she hardly knew how she had got there. And
as cold—just as I’m five times as rich as you are, _and_ five times as
Fit for the deed I had to do.
“It isn’t respectable to beg,” said the King.
come undone again; and there it was, spread over the hearth-rug, all
“You are sad,” the Knight said in an anxious tone: “let me sing you a
“I hope you don’t suppose those are real tears?” Tweedledum interrupted
“I don’t _rejoice_ in insects at all,” Alice explained, “because I’m
The White Queen only looked at her in a helpless frightened sort of
“I didn’t know I was to have a party at all,” said Alice; “but if there
hearth-rugs, table-cloths, dish-covers and coal-scuttles. “I hope
The other two dancers were fat, and very soon out of breath. “Four
_quite_ content. Who’s been repeating all that hard stuff to you?”
“Not very nice _alone_,” he interrupted, quite eagerly: “but you’ve no
began rather timidly: “Am I addressing the White Queen?”
“That’s just what I complain of! You _should_ have meant! What do you
it wasn’t exactly running, but a new invention of hers for getting down
“Do you hear the snow against the window-panes, Kitty? How nice and
10. W.Q. to Q.R.’s 6th (_soup_)
At this moment her thoughts were interrupted by a loud shouting of
been doing, I was very nearly opening the window, and putting you out
his last remark was evidently addressed to a tree—so she stood and
*      *      *      *      *      *      *
feverish after so much thinking.” So they set to work and fanned her
Pepper and vinegar besides
things Alice used to say, beginning with her favourite phrase “Let’s
hall, and noticed that there were about fifty guests, of all kinds:
daisies, who were just beginning again, she whispered, “If you don’t
itself (as she described it afterwards), and the next moment she found
’Twas brillig, and the slithy toves
half dream, to the melancholy music of the song.
Are half a life asunder,
emphasis.
the kitten and the Queen to look at each other. “Now, Kitty!” she
of hurting his feelings.
remember the rule. You must be very happy, living in this wood, and
And vanish’d summer glory—
CHAPTER II.
at Alice. And a great many voices all said together (“like the chorus
like that—as if Dinah hadn’t washed you this morning! You see, Kitty,
ear: “something about ‘you _would_ if you could,’ you know.”
giving it a little kiss to make it understand that it was in disgrace.
generally get to somewhere else—if you ran very fast for a long time,
she said.
thoughtfully: “but don’t you think it would be rather hard?”
“A present given when it isn’t your birthday, of course.”
stairs quickly and easily, as Alice said to herself. She just kept the
“How would you like to live in Looking-glass House, Kitty? I wonder if
*      *      *      *      *      *      *
reply.
is Happy. I hate him with an H, because he is Hideous. I fed him
“Is she like me?” Alice asked eagerly, for the thought crossed her
one and one and one and one and one and one and one and one?”
Looking-Glass house
It certainly was a _very_ large Gnat: “about the size of a chicken,”
the gravy, “just like pigs in a trough!” thought Alice.
“I don’t care about the colour,” the Tiger-lily remarked. “If only her
6. R. Kt. to K.’s 2nd (ch.)
way over his shoulder, and began writing for him.
if she wanted to shake it off. “My finger’s bleeding! Oh, oh, oh, oh!”
“Then I suppose they’ll soon bring the white bread and the brown?”
their wages, you know.”
The Lion had joined them while this was going on: he looked very tired
his voice rose to a perfect scream.
In another moment Alice was through the glass, and had jumped lightly
very carefully, because the Knight was so _very_ awkward in putting in
_little_ shy with it, as she had been with the mutton; however, she
lovingly round the soft neck of the Fawn, till they came out into
afterwards), and the consequence was that the handle of it caught her
when they ask me how I like my walk. I shall say—‘Oh, I like it well
were comfortably settled again, “when I saw all the mischief you had
you talk with a person if they always say the same thing?”
When one speaks, they all begin together, and it’s enough to make one
puzzling, was, “L, I _know_ it begins with L!”
I did fall,” he went on, “_The King has promised me—with his very own
her.
“I’m seven and a half exactly.”
don’t make any more excuses, but listen! Number two: you pulled
Rocking-horse-fly, if you look. It’s made entirely of wood, and gets
Meaning to say he did not choose
“I hope you’re not much tired?” she said at last.
“But aren’t you going to run and help her?” Alice asked, very much
fire-irons, and many other things.
the carriage rise straight up into the air, and in her fright she
afternoon—the time when you begin _broiling_ things for dinner.”
practice!”
It spoke in a thick, suety sort of voice, and Alice hadn’t a word to
“Does that kind go smoothly?” the Knight asked in a tone of great
asked “Does she ever come out here?”
that he had a habit of now and then falling off sideways; and as he
Alice wondered a little at this, but she was too much in awe of the
“Yes, if you like,” said Alice.
In fact it was rather difficult for her to keep in her place while she
“It isn’t manners for us to begin, you know,” said the Rose, “and I
“You might make a joke on _that_,” said the little voice close to her
certain he would only shout out “Contrariwise!” and so he did.
paw went into your eye? Well, that’s _your_ fault, for keeping your
we find any plum-cake. Help me to get it into this bag.”
long,” said Tweedledum. “What’s the time now?”
“And how many birthdays have you?”
And What Alice Found There
she couldn’t help saying to herself as she went, “Of all the
sometimes in the winter we take as many as five nights together—for
if you understood it: and when I said ‘Check!’ you purred! Well, it
dropped to her knees, and put her hands over her ears, vainly trying to
They thanked him much for that.
little white thing. “Not a rattle-_snake_, you know,” she added
fell off instantly. The confusion got worse every moment, and Alice was
“If _that_ doesn’t ‘drum them out of town,’” she thought to herself,
walking arm in arm—I don’t think they can hear me,” she went on, as she
walks much faster than I do!”
‘To come and spoil the fun!’
Alice looked round her in great surprise. “Why, I do believe we’ve been
it! Let’s pretend there’s a way of getting through into it, somehow,
all my ideas about Looking-glass House. First, there’s the room you can
some alarm), “you may observe a Bread-and-Butterfly. Its wings are thin
made her speech: the two Queens pushed her so, one on each side, that
were carefully rolled up, and the little arms were plunged in
as she dragged him out by the feet, and laid him in a heap on the bank.
“And what does it live on?”
“Well, yes, if you call that a-dressing,” The Queen said. “It isn’t
“And curtsey while you’re thinking what to—what to purr. It saves time,
“Not you!” Tweedledee retorted contemptuously. “You’d be nowhere. Why,
at the top of her voice, and all the guests began drinking it directly,
soft it sounds! Just as if some one was kissing the window all over
Which do _you_ think it was?
slices of Bread-and-butter, its body is a crust, and its head is a lump
“That’s enough to begin with,” Humpty Dumpty interrupted: “there are
“I’ll tell you, if you’ll move a little further on,” the Fawn said. “I
would hardly come out again.
say in reply: she could only sit and look at it and gasp.
“That would be all the better, wouldn’t it?” the Queen said, as she
dress themselves all in green, and dance about—whenever the wind
Dumpty—But you make no remark?”
“Nohow!” Tweedledum cried out briskly, and shut his mouth up again with
He shouted this so loud that Alice couldn’t help saying, “Hush! You’ll
“Of course it must,” Humpty Dumpty said with a short laugh: “_my_ name
over her head, and fanning her with its wings.
counting?” In a minute there was silence again, and the same shrill
“Are there any more people in the garden besides me?” Alice said, not
but, before she put him on the table, she thought she might as well
“And can _all_ the flowers talk?”
JABBERWOCKY.
The Jabberwock, with eyes of flame,
“In hopes some bees may make a nest in it—then I should get the honey.”
“Now! Now!” cried the Queen. “Faster! Faster!” And they went so fast
“We _can_ talk,” said the Tiger-lily: “when there’s anybody worth
‘Come, tell me how you live,’ I cried,
Dumpty? I _think_ you did—however, you’d better not mention it to your
Alice could not help laughing at this, even in the midst of her tears.
“Not at all,” said the King. “He’s an Anglo-Saxon Messenger—and those
so many things hung round the horse—” So she went on talking to
The way Dinah washed her children’s faces was this: first she held the
“Now I declare that’s too bad!” Humpty Dumpty cried, breaking into a
sat down, and said “Thank you” rather sadly.
“She can’t do sums a _bit_!” the Queens said together, with great
Then they let go of Alice’s hands, and stood looking at her for a
untidy.”
Because she thought the sun
rain?”
bewilderment.
settled comfortably down, with one elbow in the rug, and her chin in
And yet another four;
Humpty Dumpty
And his answer trickled through my head
“A little kindness—and putting her hair in papers—would do wonders with
his eyes and said “Wait till you’ve tried.”
We cannot do with more than four,
remember!” And she caught it up and gave it one little kiss, “just in
if he thought that was the most likely place to find one.
“Really, Dinah ought to have taught you better manners! You _ought_,
tree, for fear of being run over, and watched them go by.
Conveniently low:
said, looking at her for the first time, “but tell me your name and
I told them once, I told them twice:
“Very well,” the other said, rather sadly: “and _she_ can watch us—only
“_Why_ do you say ‘feather’ so often?” Alice asked at last, rather
Hatta looked round and nodded, and went on with his bread and butter.
was his own helmet.”
at finding the Red Queen and the White Queen sitting close to her, one
“But they should be five times as _cold_, by the same rule—”
and a nose and mouth; and when she had come close to it, she saw
just looking round to see if the word ‘TWEEDLE’ was written at the back
help to settle it! I’m sure your paw can wait!” But the provoking
thought this wouldn’t be quite a civil question to ask.
rounder—and—
“I _am_ real!” said Alice and began to cry.
never make bargains.”
Here the White Queen began again. “It was _such_ a thunderstorm, you
Alice couldn’t help laughing, as she said, “I don’t want you to hire
By boiling it in wine.
Humpty Dumpty looked doubtful. “I’d rather see that done on paper,” he
believed as many as six impossible things before breakfast. There goes
CHAPTER VII. The Lion and the Unicorn
Queen Alice
The Knight looked surprised at the question. “What does it matter where
Alice did so. “It’s very hard,” she said, “but I don’t see what that
But four young oysters hurried up,
Had got no business to be there
and rounder, till her hand shook so with laughing that she nearly let
a border of daisies, and a willow-tree growing in the middle.
but Alice felt she _could not_ go faster, though she had not breath
the old room,” thought Alice: “warmer, in fact, because there’ll be no
startled by the fall, as for some time he had kept on very well, and
to curtsey this time, but walked on quickly to the next peg, where she
Eighth Square we shall be Queens together, and it’s all feasting and
I carry it upside-down, so that the rain can’t get in.”
might as well try to catch a Bandersnatch! But I’ll make a memorandum
“It may—if it chooses,” said Tweedledee: “we’ve no objection.
choose a subject—” (“He talks about it just as if it was a game!”
suddenly), he fell off behind. Otherwise he kept on pretty well, except
Dumpty went on, wagging his head gravely from side to side: “for to get
So they walked on together though the wood, Alice with her arms clasped
turn her head just in time to see one of the White Pawns roll over and
and to lose all their scent and beauty, from the very moment that she
The eldest Oyster looked at him.
putting out one paw and gently touching the ball, as if it would be
Their shoes were clean and neat—
tell me which road leads out of the wood?”
opportunity to make peace.
“I shall dream about a thousand pounds tonight, I know I shall!”
Kitty—all through the Looking-Glass world. Did you know it, dear?”
which Alice had put “_The White Knight is sliding down the poker. He
11. Alice takes R.Q. & wins
herself, “Thirty times three makes ninety. I wonder if any one’s
and said, “It’s only a brook we have to jump over.” Everybody seemed
And why the sea is boiling hot—
Long time the manxome foe he sought—
holly-leaves, and its head is a raisin burning in brandy.”
something kind, but really couldn’t think of anything at the moment.
“Oh!” said Alice. She was too much puzzled to make any other remark.
settled again and remarked, “I suppose you don’t want to lose your
“Well, now that we _have_ seen each other,” said the Unicorn, “if
“Well, not the _next_ day,” the Knight repeated as before: “not the
said.
for certain—but I’m afraid it _would_ be a little hard.”
Alice), there was no way of guessing, but she was gone, and Alice began
The Unicorn looked dreamily at Alice, and said “Talk, child.”
There was a short silence after this, and then the Knight went on
said. “How is bread made?”
Now if you’re ready Oysters dear,
the old room was quite common and uninteresting, but that all the rest
He left it dead, and with its head
found that it was the best plan not to walk _quite_ close to the horse.
The Sheep took the money, and put it away in a box: then she said “I
hastily, thinking that he was frightened: “only an old rattle—quite old
high enough already.’ Now, first I put my head on the top of the
Looking-glass) had got the face of a little old man, and grinned at
end of a year? I should be sent to prison, I suppose, when the day
the way! Never!”
I shook him well from side to side,
“You’re holding it upside down!” Alice interrupted.
“To send all his horses and all his men,” Alice interrupted, rather
the obstinacy of the rushes in growing so far off, as, with flushed
beginning of their conversation, so she smiled and said, “If your
remember, if I can! I’m determined to do it!” But being determined
And that’s the way’ (he gave a wink)
“He’s only just out of prison, and he hadn’t finished his tea when he
like a saucepan.)
“I’ve had plenty of practice,” the Knight said very gravely: “plenty of
something like a bed of rushes with fireworks at the top. As to the
turned into a tree the moment she came up to it, and she quite expected
“Suppose he never commits the crime?” said Alice.
‘Now cook me the fish!’
“Or else it doesn’t, you know. The name of the song is called
eyes open—if you’d shut them tight up, it wouldn’t have happened. Now
“Only you _must_ eat them both, if you buy two,” said the Sheep.
With bitter tidings laden,
neck, and Alice knew which was which in a moment, because one of them
“No use, no use!” said the King. “She runs so fearfully quick. You
but somehow I felt as if I’d been singing it a long long time!”
only knew,” she thought to herself, “which was neck and which was
Alice was so astonished that she could not speak for a minute: it quite
worked the sum for him:
So the boat was left to drift down the stream as it would, till it
way you’ve come to-day. Consider what o’clock it is. Consider anything,
very fast, as she was talking all the time, sometimes to the kitten,
“You won’t make yourself a bit realler by crying,” Tweedledee remarked:
“Five times as warm, of course.”
There’s little to relate.
‘But wait a bit,’ the Oysters cried,
“So young a child,” said the gentleman sitting opposite to her (he was
“You don’t know what you’re talking about!” cried Humpty Dumpty. “How
“I will, if I can remember it so long,” said Alice.
Alice said afterwards she had never seen such a fuss made about
keep his head from being cut off,” as he said.
“Contrariwise,” added the one marked “DEE,” “if you think we’re alive,
And that was scarcely odd, because
The Horse, who had put his head out of the window, quietly drew it in
It’ll be easy enough to get through—” She was up on the chimney-piece
“Thank you very much,” said Alice.
“—for it’s all in some language I don’t know,” she said to herself.
It was getting dark so suddenly that Alice thought there must be a
CHAPTER V. Wool and Water
He took his vorpal sword in hand:
“Things flow about so here!” she said at last in a plaintive tone,
been for that nasty Knight, that came wiggling down among my pieces.
She had got all the pegs put in by this time, and Alice looked on with
‘If seven maids with seven mops
of course—but then I was part of his dream, too! _Was_ it the Red King,
“I don’t know,” Alice said doubtfully. “I don’t want to be anybody’s
Only they wouldn’t answer at all, if they were wise.”
and had just time to see the Lion and the Unicorn rise to their feet,
A-sitting on a gate.
looking away from Alice as he spoke, “to be called an egg—_Very!_”
breathless and giddy.
trains jumping at all. “However, it’ll take us into the Fourth Square,
“It would have to be a very tiny earthquake!” thought Alice. “Who are
quite taken away her breath and for a minute or two she could do
rather afraid of them—at least the large kinds. But I can tell you the
We can begin to feed.’
“So you will, when you’ve crossed the next brook,” said the White
into a better temper by a compliment. “I’ve been in many gardens
And muttered mumblingly and low,
times round is enough for one dance,” Tweedledum panted out, and they
are Anglo-Saxon attitudes. He only does them when he’s happy. His name
And the mome raths outgrabe.
“Crawling at your feet,” said the Gnat (Alice drew her feet back in
They looked so exactly like a couple of great schoolboys, that Alice
up, for the poor Knight seemed quite low-spirited about it.
once more, and, getting no answer to this, she quietly walked away: but
“I beg your pardon?” Alice said with a puzzled air.
Echoes fade and memories die.
coming on.”
5. Alice to Q.’s 6th (_Humpty Dumpty_)
“What—is—this?” he said at last.
his tree, “and it’ll let _you_ alone, you know.”
voice it had!
“Then hand round the plum-cake, Monster,” the Lion said, lying down and
place.
way, and kept repeating something in a whisper to herself that sounded
choked in all her life.
do sums, and things of that sort.”
thought he must be a stuffed figure after all.
Within, the firelight’s ruddy glow,
moment from her knitting.
-----
TTL
particular certain fucus plants whose roots were laden with the
“Nor I, sir,” Captain Nemo answered me. “I never touch the flesh of
steamship was visible on the horizon line. No flag was flapping from
*Author’s Note: A pier is a type of wharf expressly set aside for an
waves a few minutes before noon, we raised land to the west. It was
Nautilus, you’d better take some precautions!”
inside the mountain. There ensued a dreadful struggle between the
“Bosh!” Ned replied. “You can make figures do anything you want!”
dedicated to the memory of his wife, and finally the American cavalla,
“Captain Nemo,” I said, “this is an ideal, easy-to-use weapon. I ask
replied.
subject it portrays is taken from a legend, and you know how to rate
expected to win that prize, and the Union government could have
third of its crew out of action, it preferred to go to the bottom with
So the Nautilus had to halt in its venturesome course among these
plates eight inches thick, like ironclad frigates.”
Among other fowl I noted some sheathbills from the wading-bird family,
struck me as even better than salmon.
a fare-thee-well!”
“Right,” I said, carried away by the captain’s logic. “Even though the
a short distance off the shore of this desert island. Our dragnets
harder than elephant tusks, and less prone to yellowing, these teeth
he had once suffered at the hands of humanity, he had no right to mete
their lashings.
Ned Land didn’t understand. He no longer even heard me. That baleen
weapon didn’t stick in its body.”
By then we had fared 16,220 miles, or 7,500 leagues, from our starting
swift as an arrow.
sort of twilight filtering through a circular hole. Just then the
Lincoln: the underwater hunting trip, the Torres Strait, our running
crabs and cuttlefish. Here seals and otters could indulge in a
“Over it, professor?” Captain Nemo replied serenely. “No, not over it,
over on its back, and was getting ready to cut the Indian in half,
in clusters, and some jellyfish of large size that swayed in the
what superhuman creatures he owed both his life and his fortune.
the circumstances in which we’re placed. Is it a year that will bring
breathe!
100 degrees centigrade. It was sent to the pumps while new water
3. A Pearl Worth Ten Million
As for me, I passed a hand over my brow, where beads of cold sweat
of vision even greater than Ned Land’s. When this stranger focused his
that from the tastiest fruits.”
I led the Canadian to the room where the Nautilus’s men were putting
CHAPTER 1
feet. Increase its dimensions fivefold or even tenfold, then give this
The Nautilus broke these waters with the edge of its spur after doing
hours before us, and in a few hours one can do a great many things!”
eat!”
meters down.
shadows over my new domains!”
it abreast. Its construction was continued by Darius the Great, son of
believing in krakens, sea serpents, “Moby Dicks,” and other all-out
vultures, the only morticians in these parts. But there was no
conditions in which you’re placed. The sea contains it. Fine. But it
underwater cliffs reared up, straight walls made of craggy chunks
perfect disk. It was white underneath and reddish on top, with big
rendered by Captain Nemo himself from his own personal observations.
this town still belonged to France.
On the rocky, volcanic seafloor, there bloomed quite a collection of
mammals wanted to relocate, they moved in little jumps made by
when their waterspouts swept like a torrent over the Abraham
At this point the propeller’s vibrations slowed down appreciably, then
keep alive such huge specimens of life from another age, this sea that
centimeters at the socket. Made of solid ivory, without striations,
others to be preserved.
Near evening one more meter had been dug from the trench. When I
had just cleared the Isthmus of Suez.
the northernmost regions, which marks the beginning of the equinoctial
snails, sea butterflies—every kind of delicate, fragile seashell that
“But this air must be swiftly depleted.”
shore on an island located in latitude 8 degrees 18’ south and
“Nothing ever comes to an end in these volcanic waterways,” Captain
I’ll finish up this catalog, a little dry but quite accurate, with the
encountered in herds of 200 or 300! As for them, they’re cruel,
luxurious piece of jewelry, because I don’t know of any female ear
Bank.
threaded copper onto which the metal helmet was screwed. Three holes,
in that Bay of Vigo, and all that’s left is for you to probe the
exhaustion of the day before, and I climbed onto the platform just as
would have been disastrous on the narrow paths cut into the sides of
the Nautilus is impossible. We are not even constrained by our word of
southwest near Cumberland Passage. I thought it was about to charge
of the head striped with small distinct lines, and also a dozen seals
Hope. One day we were chased by the longboats of a whaling vessel,
this underwater boat have escaped public notice? Keeping a secret
crew battled with flailing axes. The Canadian, Conseil, and I sank our
voyage: that hunting trip in the Crespo forests, our running aground
has grasped all this, one still knows next to nothing, because these
certainly dated from some far-off time. To be so caked with the
in other words, worthy of serving a lofty and passionate spirit. This
unusual fish from the genus Monopterus, whose members have no fin but
ultimately have put back to that cape in the south.
“This boat hasn’t moved at all?”
hardcover first edition issued in the autumn of 1871, collated with
I tried to call out. What was the use at such a distance! My swollen
to you. Let this first time you’ve come to discuss this subject also
We stood stock-still, not knowing what surprise was waiting for us,
opening that put the boat’s interior in contact with the atmosphere.
that you haven’t disowned all human feeling. We’re castaways whom
the main lounge, a collision occurred, scarcely noticeable on the
offensive weapons, and you have the animal we’re looking for. It would
Right off, I detected an odor permeating the compartment that was sui
A quarter of an hour later, Conseil approached me, saying:
straight ahead, and shouted a request for directions, which was
regret those words he had just pronounced in French? You would have
extremities were already growing cold, and I saw that death was
“That’s my feeling,” Ned Land replied coolly. “Let’s wait for
the most industrialized people in the world, the English, to whom the
limit. Showers of sparks and cinders of flaming coal escaped from its
and Isabella sharks whose rounded snouts were strewn with dark
the waters. But these summits could have belonged to mountains as high
continents.”
the Nautilus was traveling through a sheath of flashing light.
can withstand the laws of nature.”
Mysterious Island (1875); in the present work Nemo’s background
“I’ll be ready to serve you a delectable piece of cake.”
“A hive?” I answered, with a gesture of utter disbelief.
“Why, Ned, why?”
constructed, and in control of its course thanks to obedient steam,
Enderby Land at latitude 68 degrees 50’, Adelaide Land at latitude 67
the genus Eleotris with curved caudal fins and violet spots on the
I told him everything I knew—or, rather, everything I didn’t know—and
“Yes! That damned captain had to call a halt just as we were going to
“Curse the beast!” Commander Farragut shouted.
themselves until they look like a pin cushion bristling with needles;
baggage wasn’t heavy. My notes, nothing more.
Suddenly, through two oblong openings, daylight appeared on both sides
wisdom to the ancient Greeks, spider crabs of the massena and
never killed anything like that!”
that’s unrivaled in the entire world, wrasse from the genus
It was an insane idea. Fortunately I controlled myself and stretched
kangaroos that fled by bounding away on their elastic paws. But these
And there I was, fantasizing about sharks, envisioning huge jaws armed
On January 13, arriving in the Timor Sea, Captain Nemo raised the
needs unique to the Nautilus. That dial I see there, with the needle
surface, which experienced neither ripples nor undulations. The
thrashing the waves up and down, at the expense of their speed.”
depth of about sixty feet. So circumstances were in favor of the
On the 23rd, several officers circled the island and brought back some
in the presence of these zoophyte and mollusk specimens, the fine lad
studied so thoroughly and unceasingly. Then, going on:
feeding on herring, mackerel, salmon, and codfish; although they
sometimes swam in the midst of the waters, sometimes drifted on their
the chamber of any ordinary rifle could hold ten of them.”
Crustaceans are subdivided into nine orders, and the first of these
“Surely,” Captain Nemo replied serenely. “Under that tongue of land,
Shortage of Air
unusual sight.
with distrust in these heavily traveled seas, or did he simply want to
exhibits ever put before the eyes of a naturalist. My professorial
grace period of just three days more. After this three-day delay, if
fashion—it bounced off that rounded surface and vanished into the sea
soil with his foot, as if he were laying claim to it. Yet it had been
Suddenly I regained consciousness. A few whiffs of air had entered my
“Ye gods, I never would have believed it,” Conseil said.
remained hermetically sealed. After determining the Nautilus’s
was turning red, a coloration caused by the presence of iron
Twenty minutes later we boarded ship. The hatches were open. After
hunt lions on the Atlas plains or tigers in the jungles of India, you
answer was called for. This man expressed himself with perfect ease
efforts. We must counteract this solidification. We must hold it in
Arriving at this 300-foot depth, I still detected the sun’s rays, but
wide, it’s only fifty-two kilometers long, and with the Nautilus
wonderful peppery-furrow shells; several valuable species of cythera
and electric eels.”
coral, clothe their tissue in a limestone crust, and their variations
bright. Dressed in diving suits, crewmen were busy clearing away
CHAPTER 3
stingers make them quite dangerous to pick up, then dolphinfish with
“Yes, Ned.”
That day the usual work was accomplished with even greater
spent his time preparing the meat and flour products he had brought
the day, especially at a time when Captain Nemo was recklessly racing
For six months the war seesawed. With inexhaustible zest, the popular
insides. The latter reflected the sun’s rays from the thousand facets
six kilometers high, and abreast of the Cape Verde Islands, there’s
“Tremendously fascinating,” I replied.
path. That day they gathered up some unusual specimens from these
creating a considerable eddy. Never had caudal equipment thrashed the
earthly horror. But thirty feet below sea level, their dominion
Besides, on this well-chosen plateau, the cable never lies at depths
perfect lamps! After this, we should insist that nature equip them
the linen bandages, while the wounded man gazed with great staring
train. If it kept up this pace, forty hours would do it for reaching
waterways making use of iron bars and red fabrics.
that his natural vehemence would cause him to do something rash.
known the world over for its shrewd management. No transoceanic
about classification but could instantly put a name to any fish.
formed of big multilobed leaves, was enough to denote the artocarpus
7. A Whale of Unknown Species
unsatisfied. Luckily, near two o’clock Ned Land brought down a
didn’t find any additional evidence but verified that the savages
“Are there whales in the Red Sea?” Conseil asked.
twenty-five meters and went along the South American coast. Captain
pressure gauge indicated that it was staying at a depth of thirty
than to see if this cavern offered some way out.
and cracked loose the ice around the ship’s lower plating, which was
“Ned my friend,” I replied, “unlike you, I haven’t given up on our
masses were outlined on the northern horizon.
By this point it was five o’clock in the morning. Just then there was
seeming to notice me. The vessel lay a mile and a half off, and with
Among other things, we came to talk of the Nautilus’s circumstances,
smile. “But since I don’t want to be accused of foolhardiness, I’m
the last stages of sheer horror, our blood frozen in our veins, our
“Begging master’s pardon,” Conseil answered, “but this seems more like
more. I followed a guide who was immune to exhaustion.
whales!
mantle of algae and fucus plants.
With typical human fickleness, they jumped from one extreme to the
strewn with dazzling gems.
watched the Avenger’s murky shape disappearing little by little. Soon
I noted only some loggerhead turtles with long carapaces.
take place tomorrow morning in his Crespo Island forests. He hopes
fins, the Nautilus stood still. The camera was aimed at the scenery on
didn’t pronounce a single word.
generally don’t live to advanced age: their vision weakens, ulcers
like enormous amethysts, letting the light penetrate their
unfixed and elusive.
Just then a shell hit the Nautilus’s hull obliquely, failed to breach
o’clock that evening they had retrieved the damaged part. They
mythological beast with 100 eyes! The lone rebel among us was Conseil,
than that of Ireland.
“You wouldn’t!”
collision. I sat up in bed, listening in the darkness, and then was
help.”
wanted to be taken to a Spanish port, if not to Cadiz, then to the Bay
divided them into six classes, three of which belong to the marine
thirty feet in height. It was made of black, glassy lava mixed with
procedure.”
aren’t on it but under it.”
your jaws, smack your lips and teeth, isn’t that the world’s most
cold. Moreover, to find a bearable temperature, the ship had only to
Nautilus too long to these pressures.”
I have to do is expel that water; and if I desire that the Nautilus
crossed. His looks caught the attention, and above all the strength of
of airtight fastenings and can fire in underwater conditions. But I
“150 sharks!” Ned Land yelped.
cetaceans. Aristotle put the dimensions of one squid at five cubits,
“What caused that explosion?” I asked.
shades of azure, and a whole variety of delightful winged creatures,
“Just maybe, Professor Aronnax.”
“This one?” Conseil said, pointing to a magnificent jewel in its glass
desolate natural setting, a silence barely broken by the flapping
Mediterranean’s surplus through the Strait of Gibraltar and into the
bristling with teeth; etc.
combination underwater and underground navigating.”
india-rubber seals, which insured complete safety aboard the Nautilus
sighted this slippery beast again in the Pacific high seas—I’m truly
“Help! Help!”
When I consulted the chart an hour later, I saw that the Nautilus’s
York back in the days when I was a resident of the earth’s
me going. Besides, working meant leaving the Nautilus, which meant
instrument needed to perforate the Scotia, and the power to pierce a
Latin historians Cassiodorus and Pliny, by the year 19 of the
south, if it were taking us toward those regions that have no
of vegetation. Some of the chieftains adorned their necks with
we ourselves hadn’t severed all ties with humanity. For my part, I
impenetrable frozen walls. We were the Ice Bank’s prisoners! The
There I fell to thinking about the incidents that marked our excursion
It was obvious that we did not understand each other.
I turned to Captain Nemo, and in an agitated voice:
“Tit for tat,” Captain Nemo told the Canadian. “I owed it to myself!”
And with a sudden gesture, the captain hid his face in his clenched
“Me? A fisherman!” Ned Land exclaimed.
thought it best to let him have his chat, and we all three went to sit
barometer.
pole! Is this brazen individual claiming he’ll take us even to that
right a hundred times over. These were near-ideal circumstances, and
submersible is made of sheet iron not wood; no coal to run out of,
mind with movement. The possibility of perishing in our reckless
“Because Captain Nemo recognizes that we haven’t given up all hope of
But much of the novel’s brooding power comes from Captain
“I’ve been dazzled, struck blind!”
the stronger youngsters emancipated a few paces away. When these
instant. Day and night we observed the surface of the ocean, and those
mysterious mission, my ideas about him had subtly changed. In spite of
over the black rocks. The whole meager flora of this region consisted
are mere dwarves. The liquid masses support the largest known species
located in longitude 135 degrees and latitude 10 degrees north, the
would be killing for the sake of killing. I’m well aware that’s a
since you no longer stay in contact with the shore?”
water. Lastly, I couldn’t help seeing the actual shadows of large
spoke up and demanded straight out that, at all cost, the seas be
“Yes, sir,” Captain Nemo replied solemnly, “of sharks and men!”
east-northeast, the pressure gauge indicated a pressure of five
returned from a scientific undertaking organized to explore the
platform. Two men were sufficient for this operation. The oars were
hydroxide? If so, he would have to keep up some kind of relationship
The hunt was on again, and Commander Farragut leaned over to me,
“Oh, sir, a hive!”
6. The Greek Islands
open-sea plants. Besides, it was the last day the Nautilus would spend
relationship with the shore. Did he himself never leave the Nautilus?
the first time under the waters. That day I purchased my last volumes,
“12,000, Professor Aronnax. They’re my sole remaining ties with dry
encountered. Conseil had just made a cast of the dragnet, and his gear
working out a problem for his pupils.
“In the harbor?” Ned Land said sarcastically.
chronometers. I’ve had it divided into twenty-four hours like Italian
encounter the narwhale in such a cramped strait? Many of our sailors
fucus drifting above me, some globular, others tubular: Laurencia,
I could easily see what the Canadian was driving at. In any event, I
commanded. His ship and he were one. He was its very soul. On the
Will it attack us under the waves? Will it cannonade us at the bottom
send the three of us ashore, if only so our feet don’t lose the knack
“But Ned, you’re a professional whaler, a man familiar with all the
Just then Captain Nemo asked me what I knew about the shipwreck of the
with great vigor, he soon stretched out on the ground two or three
wall about two miles in diameter, hence six miles around. Its level—as
me why this huge smelter suspended operations, and how it is that an
struggled on with tireless persistence. I estimate that we covered a
finally courage, since his deep breathing denoted tremendous reserves
translated into words.
for any eventuality and would function appropriately to shoot a few
CHAPTER 1
frigate. It was five miles from us and formed no more than a dark,
“I’m ready to go with you.”
the Bay of Bengal, the seas of the East Indies, the seas of China and
1,000 meters.
“You love the sea, captain.”
us here—”
Fortunately, after vigorous massaging by Conseil and the captain, I
I shared the results of my observations with the Canadian and Conseil.
me. They grow only for me. These forests aren’t on land, they’re
sometimes led over plains of sand, sometimes over prairies of seaweed
But Ned Land was not mistaken, and we all spotted the object his hand
“Now then, just as this decision was being handed down, English
be . . .”
“Wait a little while. Our beacon is about to go on, and if you want
if it suited me to come along.
to set aside any hope of returning to European seas. Captain Nemo kept
14’ on the 35th meridian, and as far as 74 degrees 15’ on the 36th. In
stateroom and rushed into the lounge.
“But an incident,” I replied, “that may oblige you to become a
only this artificial light that I import into the depths of the seas!
cetaceans led fishermen to within a mere seven leagues of the North
CENTIGRADE 0 degrees centigrade = freezing water
this is plain butchery.”
animal with either feathers or fur, if not in this locality, then in
reach of atmospheric heat.
but vital to myriads of animals—and to me!”
our stunned silence remained unbroken until Conseil said:
“Hardly, professor. In Panama they make just $1.00 per week. In most
Commander Farragut then decided to use more direct methods.
“An underwater tunnel!” he exclaimed. “A connection between two seas!
2. A New Proposition from Captain Nemo
removed from this immense socket. But in the morning, wearing my
substances fed it, how and why it kept burning in the liquid mass, I
contract.
“Have it your way, sir,” the harpooner replied, shrugging his
various vicissitudes of our story. But despite our narrator’s fine
the platform were restored to us.
passageway, the Nautilus couldn’t enter it!”
understandable message? From Quebec to the Tuamotu Islands, from Paris
and alone on board, he didn’t share the general conviction. He avoided
Some Figures
we’ll be sealed up in this solidified water as if it were cement.”
stroll.”
“Pretty fair eating,” Ned Land replied.
several miles away! What crashes from the waters breaking against
Suddenly a slight movement could be felt over the hull. Obviously the
WITHOUT STANDING UP, we stared in the direction of the forest, my hand
“Why would you care, Ned my friend?” Conseil replied. “Since you have
“Yes, an underground passageway that I’ve named the Arabian Tunnel. It
summits, and weigh two pounds each. In the top part of this enormous
those shores he wanted to avoid, gave Captain Nemo no pleasure. Its
contains his full life story? Will I finally learn the man’s name?
“To put a simple question to you, sir,” the Canadian answered me.
“Well, come along and you’ll see!”
Just then the moon appeared for an instant through the watery mass,
Ned Land tried to lodge a complaint, but the only answer he got was a
“I give you my word, professor,” Ned Land replied in an unenthusiastic
catch up on his eating and sleeping, to make up for the time he had so
forests. Enormous trees, sometimes as high as 200 feet, were linked to
when he placed his thermometer in contact with the various layers of
“By thunder, sir!” Ned Land exclaimed. “There you go, talking like a
but without spotting a thing. Sky and water merged into a perfectly
by hand. The latter method calls for the services of a diver, but it’s
and that of a ton is 1,000 liters, so the Nautilus holds 1,500,000
I’ve had these past two months, you’ve got nothing to complain about!”
this craft?”
northern sky. At our feet: dazzling tracts of white. Over our heads: a
being admitted into the ballast tanks. The Nautilus slowly settled and
can’t unballast the Nautilus, which seems impossible to me, I don’t
mechanism that reproduces them via the budding process, and they have
them resemble flimsy gondolas, crowned ferola snails, atlanta snails
coming from the West Indies. Now then, unloading the ingots from those
settled into what we have today. Solid matter had wrested from liquid
looked gloomier than ever. What was filling him with such sadness? Was
prodigious number of animals were still swarming: zoophytes,
sharks five meters long, the head squat and wider than the body, the
centimeters.
days. They went in groups of five or six, hunting in packs like wolves
be torn loose from its powerful suction. Seven arms out of eight had
Nantes, France.
could already feel a definite pain around my pelvic girdle. And how I
taken place in Europe and America with yourself as the subject. You
circumference. Soon their picks were vigorously attacking this compact
masting still upright, their rigging stiffened by the water. They
“What do you figure, then?”
stationed on the American west coast. Dropping anchor before Vanikoro
the branch Mollusca is divided into five classes; that the first class
to those used in oyster fishing.
unknown beaches on the Siberian coast? I’m unable to say. I lost track
memories crossed over from one dream to the next, not giving my brain
resentment that this man must have felt toward the Canadian. In
with us!”
robins, whose lips glowed in the dark, at night scrawling fiery
offered any guarantees. The deranged needles would mark contradictory
India, he had even predetermined the creation of this pearl by
I estimate—but perhaps I’m mistaken—that the Nautilus’s haphazard
live coals, all the while repeating:
incalculable.
these Antarctic seas at depths as great as 1,000 meters; then small
weighing 1,800 pounds, a cast-iron eight-pounder cannon, a lead ingot,
Contents
terrestrial foods long ago, and I’m none the worse for it. My crew are
a vast perimeter.
comb. This order consists of fifteen families, in other words,
impossible and yet incontestably real. This was no fantasy. This was
Even if he knew it by heart, a man in my disturbed, befuddled
distance. But I knew that the sun’s rays, even in the clearest seas,
pressed energetically forward with the arming of his frigate.
Gueboroa Island.
being. Ned Land stayed at his post, harpoon in hand. Several times the
the marrow of a hunter. A large bird with a wide wingspan, quite
disk is cut exactly in half by the northern horizon, that will mean
animal?”
its chief arm makes for the shores of Ireland and Norway while the
observations.
Captain Nemo had picked an odd time to philosophize. All in all, this
Nautilus wants to visit the Red Sea, the Strait of Bab el Mandeb is
the vast liquid plains of the Pacific, the Mediterranean is a mere
Captain Nemo reentered his stateroom, and I saw no more of him for a
genus Xiphias, swimming in schools, sporting yellowish sickle-shaped
“You may be sure of that, Ned,” I answered, “but I’m not. That’s why I
dialogue was driving at, and wondering if this incident related to our
merely one of those unappreciated scientists who repay humanity’s
naturalists call ‘below-the-wing’ feathers. These feathers are
them. They knew nothing. Lost in a heavy sleep of which they had no
lay in longitude 15 degrees 12’ and latitude 45 degrees 37’. It was
pearls, the unusual handiwork of various mollusks from every ocean and
or other, an urge or a whim if you prefer, can bring to the upper
brought us some clothes, jackets and sailor’s pants, made out of a
caused an immense uproar.
ladder of branches, groups, classes, subclasses, orders, families,
Vanikoro behind with extraordinary speed. Its heading was
the seaports and deranged the public mind even far inland, it must be
shooting stars.
of an archduke whom they prematurely dubbed King Charles III.
“I’m unable to say, my friend.”
library: books on mechanics, ballistics, hydrography, meteorology,
NIGHT FELL. I went to bed. I slept pretty poorly. Man-eaters played a
board in the seas of Japan.
not fighting. Built to pursue, it was being pursued, and I commented
lounge.
on a devilfish’s arm.
you’ve charitably taken aboard, we’ll never forget that. Speaking for
freshwater fish!”
yet if one of those conical shells had scored a routine hit on the
clearly visible, approached and hovered over us. When it was just a
racing with each other. Looking like big bluish shadows, thresher
sea. The rock was a devilfish.”
I reentered my stateroom. From there I could hear movements inside
companion, he conversed with him in a language I didn’t recognize. It
Discovered in 1511 by the Portuguese Francisco Serrano, these shores
The skiff was aground ten fathoms away from us.
time. In these strange circumstances the scope for conjecture was
walls of his stateroom, “these are the devices needed to navigate the
Weber, Rossini, Mozart, Beethoven, Haydn, Meyerbeer, Hérold, Wagner,
our artificial light. Not even sunshine could have been better for our
sea.
incandescence, can rise to a white heat, overpower the liquid element,
Gardens, and it would have attracted every curiosity seeker in town!”
him.
surface, and a few moments later the animal’s body appeared and rolled
broken voice:
the horizon. Apparently the jealous orb didn’t want to reveal this
Arriving at the summit of this peak, Captain Nemo carefully determined
fifteen minutes before noon. I’m going to rise to the surface of the
bone. Generally these savages were naked. I noted some women among
some with horizontal heraldic bars and enhanced by a black strip
able to understand anything, even silence. I have nothing more to say
with a mixture of fear and fascination, in the same way, no doubt,
mouths were paved with teeth arranged like a mosaic, and some big
for anybody who wanted to take a stroll.
years in succession.”
derelict vessels, whose numbers are unfortunately considerable, since
teeth were half bared. His rigid body, clenched fists, and head drawn
formations. Thanks to the work of polyps, a slow but steady upheaval
network of long, hopelessly tangled fibers that were puttied with a
fears about breathing. There’s enough for everyone.”
For part of the night, the novelty of our circumstances kept Conseil
the inner base of this mountain, but then the walls overhang, they
“Count what?”
English rebuilt after capturing it in 1839. I glimpsed the octagonal
many islets surrounding them, used to be part of the Magellan
Captain Baker at first thought he was in the presence of an unknown
a sailmaker’s needle through canvas!
barely perceptible mass. But as for longboats, not a one in sight!
“Call it anything you like.”
districts, the sun had started back down, and tomorrow it would cast
physical traits could be seen in them all. If I’m not mistaken, I
spirit. And it’s sad to think that this deed, which should have been
At six o’clock, sometimes afloat and sometimes submerged, the Nautilus
the wonders of the Nautilus.
belly. But that wasn’t the end of the story. A dreadful battle was
suckers, arranged over the inner sides of its tentacles and shaped
November 16, while reentering my stateroom with Ned and Conseil, I
Three o’clock then sounded. The harbor pilot went down into his dinghy
followed by his chief officer. As for our craft, it no longer stirred,
hectares. This liquid mass totals 2,250,000,000 cubic miles and could
“The Nautilus has run aground?”
half a cable length; then, not bothering to dive, it got up a little
if it lives deep in the ocean, if it frequents the liquid strata
it on his many voyages and knew how to cook its edible substance. So
the South American continent, that stray rock Dutch seamen had named
“Nevertheless, it will have to do!”
and the Astrolabe, which were never seen again.
“Ned Land!” he called.
a column of water thirty-two feet high. In reality, such a column of
So, after inquiries conducted in England, France, Russia, Prussia,
Ned Land exclaimed:
the midst of these luminous sheets of water, I then glimpsed flashes
were formed, the immense achievement of microscopic animals.
we reduced to preserving it only as a memory?”
“Just maybe, Conseil.”
sound.
a mass if it were launched at full speed!”
rare event that could excite him. That day, however, a development
water, which is denser than fresh water. Well then, when you dive
winds, and the sea is never very turbulent here, highly favorable
ones, and tossing in indescribable confusion the ten feet that nature
have no idea how the venture would have ended had not the Canadian,
overran us and soon filled up the room. Contrived in the Nautilus’s
comparatively unpopulated region of the ocean where only larger fish
value. But Captain Nemo didn’t want these gallant gentlemen wasting
letting tatters of mist trail over the mountain’s summit. Proof
Islands behind.
northward, and we must pray that this steadiness continues, because,
this collision and gone down together with those 237 passengers it was
So the Abraham Lincoln wasn’t lacking in means of destruction. But it
Soon we were imprisoned up to the neck in india-rubber clothing, and
High Arctic mists! Did it call at the capes of Spitzbergen or the
“Then, sir,” I went on, “you give us, quite simply, a choice between
handsome black and armed with a very long, slender, fleshy whip; long
skiff. I insert myself through this double opening into the
minimum length at more than 350 English feet;* this was because both
The Canadian shook his head, passed his hand over his brow, made no
“Yes, my boy. They say Julius Caesar gave Servilia a pearl worth
to arguments.
that makes our situation unacceptable, impossible, even impossible for
“Can the panels in the lounge be left open?”
made me turn around.
“Where master goes, I go,” Conseil replied.
families is divided into several genera, each genus into species, each
lay motionless, neither rolling nor pitching.
single, solitary individual.
“Yes,” he said, “the ocean owns a genuine circulation, and to start it
Islands sometimes get over 150 feet.”
From eight to nine o’clock, the Nautilus stayed a few meters beneath
the professor, his manservant, and me——”
cetacean, which stayed half a mile off.
heavy stone clutched between their feet and attached by a rope to
whole part of the Indian Ocean. Our path was bordered by hopelessly
At these words Ned Land stood up quickly. Nearly strangled, the
unable to depict it. Such sufferings are indescribable. The next day I
a wide crater vomited torrents of lava that were dispersed in fiery
A.D. From that day to this, such plutonic construction work has been
could we afford to lose.
“I use only my chronometer,” Captain Nemo answered me. “At noon
“Gentlemen,” he said in a calm voice, “there are two ways of dying
discourteous. Yet I’ll ask you to explain how these creatures can live
stateroom.
the frigate’s longboats, hailing us out of the gloom?
professed horror of continents or islands and his invitation to go
This fishing ended our stay in the waterways of the Amazon, and that
sea’s greatest river, which has its own banks, fish, and
baffling.
gone for just five minutes. I was busy tracing the Nautilus’s course
diminutive glowworm that’s colorless and gelatinous in appearance, as
snails, whelks, harp shells, spiky periwinkles, triton snails, horn
not in agreement on the structural mode of sponges. For some it’s a
For certain, I came to quickly, because someone was massaging me so
surfaces measure at least twenty-seven square feet.
passageway, and I consulted them with scrupulous care.
see.”
agreed pretty closely as to the structure of the object or creature in
and it will only return to the surface after we’ve cleared the Arabian
stuffed animals and dried plants to Paris, France. I opened a line of
that oblong object the body of the man who must have died during the
“Well, we’ve got to accept!” the Canadian answered. “Once we’re on
“Come on! Come with me! Come higher!”
Mr. Land. Pull out of your bag of tricks the best English ever spoken
them to the ends of the earth. Baleen whales like to frequent the
Then our ship went along at a distance of six miles from the Arabic
philanthropy went out both to downtrodden races and to individuals!
Cape Horn after their hometown of Hoorn. Our course was set for the
applauding. Brandished in its captain’s hands, the Nautilus was simply
“Fair enough, captain, but if we’re going to see, we need light to
for a good while. There was a mighty explosion, mingled with cheers
“If master would oblige me by leaning on my shoulder, master will swim
he playing on my credulity? Time would tell.
“Well, Mr. Land?” he said.
The captain didn’t reply but went to lean against the window.
gobies that were long and plump with yellow fins and jutting jaws,
Calcutta & Burnach Steam Navigation Co., encountered this moving mass
overboard? Was the Abraham Lincoln tacking about? Would Commander
pectoral fins gifted with remarkable strength, their caudal fins
waited for the fearsome man-eater with wonderful composure, and when
over the Mannar oysterbank. Two impressions inevitably stood out. One
About 300 meters down, just as Captain Nemo had predicted, we cruised
No hellos or good mornings for this gent! You would have thought this
self-control. Ten or twelve devilfish had overrun the Nautilus’s
twenty meters wide and filled with quiet water. So the ship could
a hatch, a “manhole,” to use the official term; but the lines of
“It wouldn’t displease me one bit.”
heavy enough to protect me from this animal’s bites, I couldn’t keep
journalists making a profession of science battled with those making a
harpoon with expert hands.
reviving only when his pilot’s instincts took over. Then, steering his
you meddling with them.”
of unearthly creatures. Now then, the sea is precisely their best
turret snails, olive shells of the “tent olive” species with neatly
I hoisted myself up to the crosstrees of the mizzen sail. Some
“Quarto,” Conseil went on, unabashed, “the apods, with long bodies
have various methods for catching them that we couldn’t use. Sometimes
of this tasty game, and whether he regretted having no rifle in his
underwater machine really was.
lying in the jaws of a fearsome monster, jaws irresistibly closing.
Secretary of the Navy.
hastened to reassure them. In fact, there could be no immediate
in their corners like inanimate objects.
I hadn’t seen him for a good while. He looked gloomy to me. Without
3. As Master Wishes
seas but only along coastlines. According to his calculations, this
“Finally, an actual event,” Ned Land said.
the oozings of marine plants. Your mattress was made from the ocean’s
waves. Stationed on the top steps, one of the seamen undid the bolts
I went over to Captain Nemo.
the Ice Bank in latitude 62 degrees 57’, sighting the Louis-Philippe
mother-of-pearl is deposited in thin, concentric layers over several
least an excuse. It can’t be denied that some species of squid and
10, 1770. The craft that Cook was aboard charged into some coral rock,
could stop him, he seized it with both hands.
months. But precisely because sailors’ luck has led me into these seas
blennies whose eggs hatch inside their bodies like those of snakes,
screw pines. We hugged it from less than two miles out.
intense that after simply going through the mechanism, water drawn
the competition!”
ill-mannered to dispute them, since your daily experience bears them
was closed and I couldn’t see its accommodations, which might have
a frightful noise. This noise existed, perhaps, only in my
We could still hope that the animal would tire out and not be as
familiar with the sight of icebergs. Conseil and I were marveling at
pearl oyster Meleagrina margaritifera, that valuable shellfish. Pearls
voyage. As for Captain Nemo, he was no longer in the picture. As for
pale yellow head and scruff of the neck, emerald throat, the belly and
“Did you know, professor,” he asked me with a smile, “that the sea
starfish, common jellyfish, angel-wing clams, and other phosphorescent
other words, descendants with the most exalted origins to which a
“rabbit kangaroos” that usually dwell in the hollows of trees and are
“That’s regrettable,” Conseil answered. “I’d like to come face to face
as more abundant than it might have been in the arctic or tropical
depths of one Rouquayrol device. Instead of breathing it themselves,
As for me, what had harrowed my heart in the thick of this struggle
“I can’t wait to find out.”
rest on the seafloor.
and race after the animal sighted, only to find an ordinary baleen
Carthaginians, those Dutchmen of antiquity who went along the west
renewing his oxygen supply every twenty-four hours? In any event,
sharks, dagger in one hand and noose in the other; but I also know
After our position had been marked on the chart, I saw that we were
hulks of ships. Out of these trunks and kegs spilled ingots of gold
reports. This magnificent radiance had to come from some force with a
the shark’s corpse again, floating.
circumference. A narrow channel separated it from a considerable
curses!
currents of the Volga, Danube, Po, Rhine, Loire, and Oder, while
finding him angered, or worse, saddened by my deserting him.
majesty. Gathering speed little by little, the ship navigated on the
hearing the tales of his adventures in the polar seas. He described
“You’re right, Professor Aronnax,” he told me. “If I can’t take the
day the Nautilus was put to work in some depth-sounding experiments
by the Imam of Muscat, which I had believed to be unrivaled in the
organ-pipe coral, stony coral, star coral, fungus coral, and sea
gallant lad was already muttering choice words from the naturalist’s
defender; George Washington, founder of the American Union; Daniele
reported on the world map. I didn’t know where we were.
rudimentary lifestyles of sea lilies and starfish.”
understand the Canadian’s passionate craving for red meat. Then our
were genuinely connected between Cape Boeo and Cape Farina.”
each other in tranquility, and the sea offered the orb of night the
from branch to branch. Carried away, I didn’t feel exhausted any
The Canadian, Conseil, and I had a pretty long conversation on this
been cut all the way through yet; and even if it was, a boat as
looked at us with gentle eyes. These were seals of various species,
air. It was horrible.
Sesostris who started digging the canal needed to join the Nile with
An apt remark. For who could predict the minimum time we would need to
which a collector would have paid more than 1,000 francs. Its
“It must have tasted pretty bad,” Ned Land added.
of flotation. The Nautilus submerged without delay.
landmarks. But streaks of water, parted by the ship’s spur, sometimes
After leaving Keeling Island, our pace got generally slower. It also
After clearing the outer belt of rocks via a narrow passageway, the
regions, man will finally reach this unknown spot on the globe.
science, like America’s Commander Maury, whose careers were ruined by
“In all likelihood, Conseil, because some convulsion created an
question to you?”
“One can easily see,” I answered, “that those historians didn’t
horizon, the Nautilus submerged to a depth between twenty and
“And you’ll try to get away by swimming?”
“Break out of here!”
reached its maximum intensity. It was impossible to stand upright
glimpsed, and the rest I missed completely because of the Nautilus’s
confidence little by little and tried to become more familiar with
few miles off the coast of Spain. It’ll be cloudy tonight. The wind’s
won’t be up yet. We’ll take advantage of the darkness. Come to the
too fast, our Creator twisted their tails, and ever since they’ve been
waves. In an instant the frigate’s deck would become densely
yet!”
“What sort of bipeds?”
three-pronged glass snails with yellow fins and transparent shells,
Decamps, Troyon, Meissonier, Daubigny, etc., and some wonderful
Nautilus, even more fearsome than itself, and which it couldn’t grip
round, and Malaysians, who give them the name “pisang,” eat them
The next day, January 6: nothing new on board. Not a sound inside, not
humus. Propelled by the waves, a coconut arrived on this new
five and a half months since fate had brought us on board, we had
epochs and not literally the lapse of time between two sunrises,
that can make me forget everything else. Like you, I’m a man neglected
it to a table of granite, and there it grew by itself in the midst of
The Canadian reported at once.
forbidden to man, did he feel right at home, the lord of these
only two months since we had become, as Captain Nemo expressed it,
salts. Although the lounge was hermetically sealed, it was filling
out of step with the general enthusiasm on board.
Papua and its neighboring islands. It was a “great emerald,” one of
Arriving at the wardrobe, I saw that neither my companions nor any
forms the powerful foundation of our globe, the deep caves cut into
“Yes, sir, it will go to the pole.”
calm. Hardly a billow. I hoped to encounter Captain Nemo there—would
shape, their water—in other words, their color—and their orient—in
situation.
ocean’s lower depths? All these insane, inadmissible ideas dogged me,
I had no reply to this. Obviously we were just groping blindly. But
impossible fantasies!
A few moments later, eight strapping fellows appeared silently, their
chance a shell’s spiral is left-handed, collectors will pay its weight
pigeons are only appetizers, snacks. So till I’ve bagged an animal
Captain Nemo told me with a half smile. “You already glimpse the
young America addressed old Europe with these wise words so rarely
or on their electric properties, coloration, and transparency, and in
“That locality lies a little above Suez in a sound that used to form a
swiftness, since within an interval of just three days, the Governor
under any other circumstances. As often as the sun swept over its
“I’ve no idea,” he answered me. “At noon we’ll fix our position.”
times greater pressure, it’s 1,756,800 kilograms; finally, at 32,000
on the fresh oxygen particles. Poor souls who have suffered from long
“Nevertheless, this . . . ,” I went on, pointing to a dish where some
of anything better, I talked to myself: I declaimed inside this copper
animal let us approach.
Finally, at six o’clock in the morning on that memorable day of March
west. This island group covers a surface area of 370 square leagues,
the droplet gets lighter, rises to the surface, there absorbs more
botanical, and zoological treasures when that incident took place with
fast-passing scenery than a traveler might see from an express train;
for us, half laughing, we massaged and comforted poor Ned Land, who
was visible for an instant, but it couldn’t have seen the Nautilus
myself, I don’t rule out that the interests of science could override
red backs and white chests distinguished by three lengthwise rows of
The sea was covered with mutilated corpses. A fearsome explosion
When I arrived in New York, the question was at the boiling point. The
Mediterranean depths could tell, this huge boneyard where so much
“Are mussels included too?” the Canadian asked.
whatever I like with my Nautilus.”
master, and much to his regret, he can’t be counted on to form a
of Syria. These waters witness the reproduction and growth of soft,
twenty-five meters near three o’clock in the afternoon. This is the
deep-water gilthead whose iris has a fiery gleam, one-meter croakers
The thermometer marked -12 degrees centigrade, and a fresh breeze left
tract of ice. Could we break through it?
“Open your eyes! Open your eyes!” repeated the sailors of the Abraham
Conseil and I were soon dressed in these diving suits, as were Captain
“That’s fine,” Ned Land answered. “I accept the explanation, but in
demand, pilgrim scallops, saddle shells that diners in the French
never changes while the land masses undergo almost continuous
“It’s new, I tell you—I bought it yesterday—my nice new RATTLE!” and
coast of the chief island in that group, between Cape Deception and
Nautilus left its coral bed at exactly that fortieth minute pinpointed
clear.
several occasions that someone had recently driven nails into it,
approached the hatch and pronounced a phrase whose exact wording
the well of the central companionway. I waited for Ned Land’s signal.
Leaning against the sides of the skiff, we were chatting of one thing
Vanikoro
their superiority. The electricity generated here makes its way to the
least imprisoned between them. And then, with no way to renew our air
its adversary approach, and then it would quickly resume its
favorable to the transmission of that electric spark that goes from
tiniest details. It contained only a table and five stools. Its
I confess that such discussions with the Canadian always baffled me. I
positively trembled.
globe and reached me at a cover address. Its keel was forged by
As I mused in this way, trying to establish in my memory every detail
CHAPTER 2
“Kindly listen to me, and you’ll see if you have grounds for accusing
“Precisely. These mines extend under the waves like the coalfields at
“It can’t be very easy to enter it.”
the gallant American navy, but they attacked me and I had to defend
of earthenware, porcelain, and glass of incalculable value. There
cross. I watched it on the map with my eyes, I saw it lose itself in
paces. Consequently, I had begun to grope my way when suddenly I saw
When the last tips of the Falkland Islands had disappeared below the
which could be pushed away or pulled near as desired, allowed books to
delphinula snails, turret snails, violet snails, European cowries,
greenery and fertile soil, man appeared. And that’s how these islands
entrusted with escorting a convoy of wheat coming from America under
because I presume this water hasn’t really changed into milk!”
francs is the current yearly return for the whole pearl-harvesting
wrapped up in my memories of the pole. We had reached that
load it on board, in other words, a single workday, then we’ll resume
slip.”
of air to be inhaled, the other for the exit of air to be exhaled, and
a jewel they can wear on their fingers, necks, and ears that’s oblong
sago palms, whose maturity was revealed by the white dust sprinkled
desperate,” he said as he left me.
“Would master kindly come here for an instant?” he said to me in an
“And that locality is . . . ?” I asked.
surface of the waves!”
repositioned a stone block weighing 84,000 pounds. It was their
keep our Canadian friend from harpooning some of these magnificent
There I put this rare egg inside one of the glass cases in the
reach of sharks!”
woolly, red-tinted hair was in sharp contrast to their bodies, which
there stood a cross of coral, extending long arms you would have
“I follow you,” I said. “But while they’re simple to do, such
Meanwhile Ned Land, less dedicated to conchology, questioned me about
simply unforgivable.
dangers my imagination had so ridiculously exaggerated. The shallows
world. These classes are the Crustacea, Cirripedia, and Annelida.
the works of modern art were pictures signed by Delacroix, Ingres,
of the hatch. But he had scarcely unscrewed the nuts when the hatch
warm water around a section of cool, tranquil, motionless ocean called
refuge. I could sink under the sea, and I could forget you ever
With Ned and Conseil, I went to sit on the platform. The coast to the
aroused to the limit by this Nautilus, the motor power it contains,
longitude 135 degrees, it headed west-northwest, going back up the
During the first months of the year 1867, the question seemed to be
wide, five high. A luminous ceiling, decorated with delicate
and currents prevented his doing so.
the founding of nautical towns, clusters of underwater households
the sight of a baleen whale that the Nautilus had pulled alongside of
but somehow I managed to pull through. With the same negative result.
Avenger, and that horrible scene of the vessel sinking with its crew
“So, Professor Aronnax,” he went on after thinking for a few moments,
Over an extensive area, the soil consisted of that igneous gravel
the force of circumstances and not on our word of honor. But his
ton. Now then, the Nautilus has a burden of 1,500 metric
wielding my pick. My movements were quite free, although they were
“You’re right, professor,” he told me after a few moments of
electricity that were like luminous dust. Then it retreated two or
The Canadian stared at Conseil, then he shrugged his shoulders. The
“Oh, sir! The old saying still holds good: Aures habent et non
challenge had been issued to the giant narwhale, and the latter had no
had become impossible. Above us, the yawning crater looked like the
maneuvers that are more time-consuming but no less infallible.”
reaps its richest rewards. No doubt we’ll be arriving a little
made demands on the supplementary oxygen in his air tanks.
with Verne. Even in our era of satellite dishes and video games, the
threaded before our eyes with extraordinary speed.
“That’s most unlikely, Conseil.”
the lounge.
Captain Nemo led me to the central companionway. In midstair he opened
trails through a huge thicket.
tools, were showing a tendency to solidify. In the face of this
watertight bulkhead; the aforesaid stateroom, 5 meters long; mine, 2.5
away. Captain Nemo never took his eyes off the two concentric circles
undamaged.”
Ruhmkorff cells. The latter would be ineffectual. One uses fewer
scarcer and scarcer. My mind was in a daze. I lay outstretched,
revenge—what had provoked it? Was he one of those unappreciated
darkness. Where were we? Had I been mistaken? Was it still night? No!
“But I don’t understand!”
and King Louis XIV ascended the French throne. I’ll let the reader
fading away. The gentleness of the man’s gaze, the generosity
removed. Only two meters separated us from the open sea. But the
Ned Land knew how to handle these trees. Taking his ax and wielding it
fish up this wonderful specimen, and surely no other Mediterranean
shell in trembling hands, “but never have I felt such excitement!”
hue.”
accept this condition?”
life entirely in the heart of this immense sea, and even his grave lay
rushed at the poor man, threw him down, held him by the throat. The
looked like a huge reef stranded in midocean. What was it? I still
Bank’s underbelly spread over us like an immense ceiling. Below,
“You’re right, professor, the Pacific tides aren’t strong,” Captain
traced their outlines in miniature on the window. But we were moving
make for a French port.
No. A jolt told me that the Nautilus had bumped the underbelly of the
“No,” I said, “the animal’s wounded, there’s its blood; but your
well chosen, his facility in elocution remarkable. And yet, to me, he
Captain Anderson immediately made his way into the hold. He discovered
“They’ve been alerted and are waiting for us.”
issue. Conseil and I could only line up behind him.
in six months, Mr. Naturalist?”
genera, subgenera, species, and varieties. But there his science came
displeasure, Captain Nemo had no liking for the neighborhood of
will give my feelings away, not even when they don’t feed us on time.”
unusual substance that, at different times, has been classified in the
Cunard. In 1840 this shrewd industrialist founded a postal service
Here a question popped into my head. How did the commander of this
insanity. I was beginning to think that the captain’s recklessness
“So let’s try it, professor.”
tangled bushes, formed from snarls of shrubs all covered with little
them, dressed from hip to knee in grass skirts held up by belts made
splendid diamond-shaped turbot that were like aquatic pheasants with
to the Nautilus’s secrets, and I don’t expect that its commander, just
important savings for Captain Nemo, who couldn’t easily renew
stationed in the pilothouse. Best to wait. The three of us returned to
substances it holds in suspension actually increase its
and for my part, I could breathe with ease.
“What if we don’t return to the Nautilus this evening?” Conseil said.
trail.
I might add that this was a man of great pride, that his calm, firm
“Perhaps this is the same as the Alecto’s,” Conseil said.
Brightly lit, the engine room measured at least 20 meters in
was disappearing more quickly than animal life. The open-sea plants
may be completely frozen over, so we couldn’t come up to the surface!”
deepest seas . . . !
by stellar radiation, seemed pitch-black in comparison with the
islets have surged up in front of the port of St. Nicolas on Palea
Over the ensuing days and weeks, Captain Nemo was very frugal with his
to destroy a contrivance of this kind just as promptly as a gigantic
“Smashed?”
500 or 600 meters in height. At its summit there gaped the circular
right then! It’s this feeling of being alien to your deepest concerns
professor. These ballast tanks exist within easy access in the lower
(1865) and Hector Servadac (1877) deal in space travel, while Journey
“Good heavens, Conseil, it’s just like old times in my office at the
the Waters, the Spirit of the Seas.
was nothing to do but go home.
freedom of movement.
bumped a block of ice. It must have been a faulty maneuver because
happened to the whales during this period? No doubt they went beneath
of Rome’s Antonine emperors; it was then abandoned and covered with
Oh, why was I so short of time! I would have gone down the steep
It was an oyster of extraordinary dimensions, a titanic giant clam, a
major parts: the frozen Arctic and Antarctic oceans, the Indian Ocean,
shape.
voyage was over, might not Captain Nemo consent to set us free in
all centered on the Nautilus’s commander. Would I ever learn the
The hatches were opened—or torn off, if you prefer—and waves of clean
helmsman, standing alone, calmer, his face smooth and serious, his
During our absence the nets had been spread, and I observed with
Conseil also fell into a heavy slumber. I was wondering what could
you see we’re just wandering around at random? People say they’ve
“But isn’t that isthmus only composed of quicksand?”
I had gotten to this point in my observations when Ned and Conseil
have formed the habit of not being amazed by anything!”
“The Mediterranean,” he told me.
“Sir,” I told the captain, “thank you for placing this library at my
its lid in characters that must have been modern Greek.
distressed to see the end of a voyage so few men will ever have a
simply underwater forests!”
“Tomorrow,” Captain Nemo added, standing up, “tomorrow at 2:40 in the
I entered the captain’s stateroom. It had an austere, almost monastic
Electric wires linked the pilothouse with the engine room, and from
“I won’t forget, sir.”
rider. In candor, none of these sounds like divinely inspired
I inched over the carpet, avoiding the tiniest bump whose noise might
The same evening, at latitude 21 degrees 30’ north, the Nautilus was
but this density isn’t uniform. In essence, if I represent the density
This maneuver did not escape the Canadian.
to the top. At which point I estimate that it held more than 1,000
zones; in the damp shade between them, there were clustered actual
irritability so intense that a reaction was bound to follow.
imagination!
If I give these highly condensed details, it is so everyone can fully
downright inexplicable phenomenon that surely no one has
piercing four centimeters of sheet iron, this tool had needed to
and rejoined a little schooner waiting for him to leeward. The
again. I felt us rising to the surface of the ocean. The hatch opened
favor. But many centuries have passed since then, and this submerged
the captain opened the door and appeared. I bowed to him. He gave me
his heart. We must understand him. What does he have to occupy him
fell asleep; but not without some anxieties.
the 37th meridian, passing well out from Cape Frio. Much to Ned Land’s
This was the last straw, and it resulted in arousing public passions
needed to be Flemish like Conseil to accept these circumstances,
below again to the lounge. The hatches closed once more, and our
Nautilus!”
sphere, like those found on standard diving suits, and the two hoses
turns on a horizontal plane, I use an ordinary, wide-bladed rudder
and I had a hunch that fate would soon give away the captain’s
“Oh!” exclaimed the Canadian, whose eyes hadn’t left the ocean. “It’s
Near midnight the sea suddenly resumed its usual hue, but behind us
continent.
horizon.
can a boat fish up in a workday?”
just a point of purchase. These plants are entirely self-propagating,
oxygen. But I was reckoning without an encounter that slightly delayed
movements.
Mediterranean? I have no idea, but usually he stayed in midwater and
of Medicine in Paris owns one of these tusks with a length of 2.25
polar circle. Lastly, on January 12, 1842, with his ships, the Erebus
“When one has the honor of being an expert as master is, one mustn’t
And yet nobody prolonged his underwater work beyond the time allotted
ask Captain Nemo this question straight out: did the captain mean to
revenged on that animal!”
As usual, dinner was served me in my stateroom. Full of anxiety, I ate
reached the island in a matter of moments.
they gave 12,000 meters, 14,091 meters, and 15,149 meters. All in all,
certain to misfire.
“Therefore,” I wrote, “after examining these different hypotheses one
“And now, Ned Land,” I added, “let’s leave it at that. Not another
that were one and a half feet long and had humps ending in
case. I repeat: let’s wait, let’s be guided by events, and let’s do
it. And in essence, professor, nature is here made manifest by all
noticeably.
town, accenting their whiteness. Outside the city limits, some wood or
little by little. He grew still more pale under the electric light
North America and eaten in such quantities by New Yorkers, variously
which, thanks to the formation of its gill covers, can protect its
my gorge rises and my hair stands on end! Honestly, sir, I’d rather
water. At first there was ocean everywhere. Then, during the Silurian
I thanked Captain Nemo and approached the shelves of this
after hour went by without it showing the least sign of weariness.
The wharves of Brooklyn, and every part of New York bordering the East
Canadian’s views in which it still seemed too far away. As for
Waters, Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Waters, and A Thousand
confidence had won me over—and sometimes forgetting them to marvel at
Levant, from which we were separated by the insuperable Isthmus of
stopped me, signaled no, removed his dagger in one swift motion, and
“Right, Ned, and then picture the damage such a mass could inflict if
freedom and hatred of slavery could lead to plans of vengeance in a
The narwhale seemed motionless. Was it asleep perhaps, weary from its
turn. Next, natural towers with wide, steeply carved battlements
10. The Man of the Waters
“Surely.”
below sea level.
tentacles, some newly in bloom, others barely opened, while nimble
board, since its rays carried with perfect distinctness. This effect
nine meters, the Nautilus slowly skimmed every beautiful rock on the
the weather.”
sight. So he made me a proposition I hadn’t anticipated. We were to
world.
the waves, and we soon arrived at some long, winding gradients,
limbs, when an unexpected apparition brought me sharply to my feet.
went below to the lounge and brought back an excellent long-range
moving flora: sponges, sea cucumbers, jellyfish called sea
swiftly toward him.
of the passing hours. Time was in abeyance on the ship’s clocks. As
to purge the ocean of this daunting monster, to insure the safety of
from the outlined surface area a slice of ice only one meter thick,
upper parts tinted red in this light whose intensity was doubled by
privacy, can’t I have the same for myself?”
beneath the giant clam’s mantle, he allowed it to grow
with a long stare.
that could handle it.
well-built fellows—climbed onto the platform. They had come to pull up
coral polyps. It’s in this last that precious coral belongs, an
“That’s perfect, Captain Nemo, but the air you carry must be quickly
science, who are we to presume, what do we really know of these
words, one more kilogram per each square centimeter on your body’s
there. This once-important city used to contain six public
cling to the undersides of a ship, they can bring it to a halt, and by
represented by swift frigate birds, nimbly catching fish at the
ending in a double-lobed fin. Laid out on the platform, it kept
his balance.”
“True,” the captain put in.
everything. It lights me, it warms me, it’s the soul of my mechanical
The Nautilus kept to an east-northeasterly heading, a speed of twelve
wonderful, orange-hued hydra from the genus Galeolaria that clung to
forthcoming, Captain Nemo proved more affable.
their vegetating existence, and for how many centuries had they lived
I received a letter three hours before the Abraham Lincoln left its
excels at pickling and preserving these various exhibits from the
York, etc.; and each of these suppliers received my specifications
20. The Torres Strait
“An iron ship, Professor Aronnax, runs 1,125 francs per metric
No. Much to my surprise, he went back down south and returned to
“Then proceed, Mr. Land,” Captain Nemo replied.
creature that had nothing in common with the fabled sea serpent.
giant squid, cannibals, hurricanes, whale hunts, and other rip-roaring
thinnest of these ice walls.”
“Then what should we do?”
Conseil didn’t have time to complete the compliment. In the midst of
myself. Conseil had repaired to his cabin. The Nautilus slowed down,
And what a noise around our frail skiff! What roars echoing from
was cruising on the surface of the waves at a moderate speed. Nothing
various continents had become more and more dangerous, the public
different phrase, just as incomprehensible. Almost at once I saw
“Why so, Conseil?”
platform and sides. We piled helter-skelter into the thick of these
reached me. I longed to rejoin Ned Land and urge him to postpone his
would slay the narwhale, or the narwhale would slay Commander
running lengthwise; then perlon sharks, ash gray, pierced with seven
passageways from the tiniest indications. He was never wrong when he
ragged edges.
from his post. To cast off, he needed only to fire and stoke his
Lastly the book has stature as a novel of character. Even the
On December 25 the Nautilus navigated amid the island group of the New
Life-sustaining air reached our lungs! We could breathe! We could
“Perhaps.”
everyone on board doomed to perish in this tomb of ice? It was a
either Greece or Crete. Even so, these men were frugal of speech and
gaze, the sea caught on fire like a trail of gunpowder. Scattered on
overwhelmed, laid low, its roofs caved in, its temples pulled down,
The ship’s officers shared the views of their leader. They could be
with pecks of their beaks.
clothes and nailed to the deck by my lead soles, it was impossible for
1829 the Englishman Forster, commander of the Chanticleer, laid claim
the Nautilus’s men were to go with us on this new excursion.
have. He’s haunted by his former life. He seems to miss everything
with blows from picks. Even in a temperature of merely -5 degrees
Pacific tides. Besides, an escape attempt might be timely if we were
fields. Accordingly, I was sure that he had already risked his
The explanation he gives seems to entail a set of conditions that
depths, I’d be able to obtain electricity through the diverging
This incident did not interrupt our walk. For two hours we were
New York Bay. I’m able to describe this struggle of the elements
whose big head is sometimes gouged with deep cavities, sometimes
“Under it?”
electricity, and electricity gives the Nautilus heat, light, motion,
said that professional seamen were especially alarmed. Traders,
But just when I least expected it, I laid my hands on a wonder, a
through their tight ranks, Conseil couldn’t refrain from making this
“My friends,” I replied, very moved, “we’re bound to each other
“Master is right,” Conseil replied, “and I propose that we set aside
patronize the waters off Queensland, the former coming from the Gulf
me, I looked at their silver bellies, their fearsome mouths bristling
contain considerable shores, since icebergs can’t form on the high
eye. Instead of encountering friends on this approaching ship, we
“Everything you say, captain, just increases my curiosity. I’m ready
uses strainers pierced with 900 to 1,000 holes make up the seed
crumbling rocks.
heard about Dillon’s findings, and he further learned that a certain
of one of these squid are entangled in the blades. That’s why we
companions and I took great pleasure in stretching out on its
himself creates a holocaust; he detests imperialism, yet he lays
Commander of the Nautilus.
the circumstances I ultimately wasn’t sorry that he refused. In truth,
without claiming to equal such other authors as Byron and Edgar Allan
“Since the tide will be sufficient,” Conseil replied simply.
the Pacific decisively behind.
After examining this community of walruses, I decided to return in my
pondering some philosophical problem, while bright red lories passed
this reply? On March 22 the Nautilus had dived under the open waters
In the sky toward the southern horizon, there stretched a dazzling
set his course for the southeast and leave the northerly regions of
identify you as an artist?”
“But professor,” our irascible companion went on, “can’t you see that
control.
the midst of this school of animals, and its nets brought up an
their prison?”
During our crossing I saw numerous baleen whales belonging to the
At three o’clock in the morning, full of uneasiness, I climbed onto
absorbing every color of the prism except its blue rays, reflected the
fascinate a naturalist; but for me they have an added charm, since
stateroom.
“Bah!” he said. “So that animal is faster than the Abraham
As for Captain Nemo, I wondered what he would make of our escaping,
exist.”
the undulations of the billows, the windows were enlivened by the
back as to go forward, because every passageway had closed behind us,
“In essence, the narwhale is armed with a sort of ivory sword, or
“All right, Conseil my friend,” the harpooner said, leaning toward the
all seriousness, “and it wasn’t my fault the whole business fell
submerged for several days without renewing our air supply.”
from my early schooldays, and I tried to narrate our adventures in
flabbergasted at your results. I would ask one question, however,
“By calculating it. Master is familiar with the ship’s capacity, hence
churned the watery mass so furiously, its eddies threatened to knock
energy originate? Was it in the extraordinary voltage obtained from
and we went forward while overhead there scudded schools of Portuguese
incident. But one circumstance arose that displayed Ned Land’s
“Well?” Captain Nemo went on.
of an airship ride, with the major difference that the Nautilus
sea to the other, either along the coasts of Canada or Siberia.”
suited to this whole survey. Ah, it’s a clever boat!”
globe’s chief seas. From this news I derived some personal
underwater by closing the fleshy valves located at the external
along, and that’ll be my excuse for not going with the captain.”
the effects produced by our galvanic rays on these huge, whimsically
supplied excellent fish for the tables on board: mackerel, bonito,
sharks with gray and whitish hides, their teeth arranged in several
no equal in his dangerous trade. Dexterity, coolness, bravery, and
“And in that event?”
you’re in the midst of air a little denser than air on land, that’s
any temperature, their line dating back to prehistoric times on this
celebrating “Christmas,” that genuine family holiday where Protestants
fishing!
If it was going to enter the English Channel, it clearly needed to
underfoot.
trimmed with filaments, some shad (spotted with black, gray, brown,
the south. Before eight days were out, the Abraham Lincoln would plow
decisive westward heading and tackled the seas of the central
first noted the bearings of Ceylon, on which antiquity lavished so
circumnavigate the globe. These, along with the efforts of Captain
spurt from its blowholes waterspouts mixed with air and steam.
least, whether they’re thermometric sounding lines, whose glass often
were splitting the rocks with exertions of their muscular roots, when
money. Where had this precious metal come from? How had the captain
nerves numb, drenched in cold sweat as if from the throes of dying!
are forever carrying around.
there snaked past those one-meter lampreys that are common to nearly
The skiff was put at our disposal for the next morning. I hardly
“Of course!” Conseil put in. “Since we’re deep in the ocean, being
of articulates, five classes of mollusks, and three vertebrate
That day I started my diary of these adventures, which has enabled me
scales, and related to the albacore species. Next came swarms of red
“An incident, captain?”
for me. But that meant this strange voyage of mine would come to an
protuberances along the back; trunkfish sprinkled with white spots on
of their disappearance; and since, thanks to it, travel between the
companions, friends he was about to visit who led lives as strange as
question you’ve no doubt been unable to resolve.”
was aground in its usual place. The Nautilus, looking like a long
“We’ve got to alert Captain Nemo,” I said, reentering the hatch.
Ned Land leaning over me, and I heard him tell me in a low voice:
a fearsome monster.”
shore where these tree forms appeared in all their glory. This was off
picked a couple bunches. As for the local fauna, it included thousands
constitution so solid, it defies all comparison.”
deserted. The Canadian sighted nothing new on the horizon, neither
“Will master allow me to make him a recommendation?” Conseil asked me.
“By what name am I to call you?”
going along this shiny surface that sparkled beneath our electric
The skiff advanced toward Mannar Island, which curved to the
that, I hope. As for the average depth of this part of the Pacific,
The relevant data on this apparition, as recorded in various logbooks,
form a sphere with a diameter of sixty leagues, whose weight would be
when Captain Nemo, who was stationed beside me, suddenly stood
underwater eruption.”
I followed him with one last burst of energy, and in a few minutes I
Indians, their physical characteristics don’t give me enough to go
the Nautilus had dived beneath the waves.
sardines from the genus Odontognathus, like three-decimeter pike,
stop and think, even for the world’s most emotionless man. What would
to go all the way up Ceylon’s west coast.
For an hour plains of sand unrolled before our steps. Often the
the horizon, walking up and down, stamping his foot, in his nervous
“Professor,” this strange man then said, “you must excuse the
did the German language, well enough to read it fluently, not well
I then did Conseil the same favor, and we continued to “navigate” side
Captain Nemo stopped, straightened up, took a few steps along the
went from the submersible itself to the engineer who had created it.
two-thirds of that amount. All in all, it’s estimated that 9,000,000
kilograms of gold, in other words, close to 5,000,000 francs.
Who ever heard of such malarkey!”
“Yes, sir, a natural barometer that didn’t let me down when I
11:30 the ballast tanks emptied, and the submersible rose to the
need oxygen from the air and are unable to spread underwater; but a
fins violet, back bluish gray, belly a silvery brown strewn with
cliffs along the beach.
which takes the sun’s altitude and tells me my latitude; chronometers,
speak of these seas, beneath which in less than ten months, I’ve
bloated puffers whose venom is extremely insidious, some olive-hued
“You know him, captain?”
Pronouncing these words in an extremely sharp tone, Captain Nemo gave
November 6. But night fell and wrapped the surging ocean in its
business dealings have been crowned with greater success. In
stamped with that southern-blooded zest that, in France, typifies the
fisherman’s trade and add this cetacean to the list of those you’ve
glass. Armed with bows, arrows, and shields, nearly all of them
“Oh good!” Ned Land exclaimed with a burst of laughter. “Mr. Conseil
since electricity is its mechanical force; no collisions to fear,
“It’s easy to find out,” I answered.
I can see Captain Nemo’s bearing to this day. Bracing himself, he
It was a huge quadrilateral with canted corners, ten meters long, six
say. But, in exchange, I experienced that irresistible desire for
this stubborn Canadian spent eight hours out of every twelve reading
The panels had opened, and I could see a completely white sea around
As the captain was finishing his sentence, I said to myself: “The
“Eh?” Conseil put in.
castaways a fair enough welcome. The latter took up residence on the
pure indigo contrasts with the green waves surrounding them. Moreover,
that, alone on board, my companions and I can’t share. And even when
themselves be struck down without offering any resistance. Several
“That damned captain,” the Canadian went on, “must really be sure of
“drew” like a furnace going full blast.
distance away.
United States and Europe, respectively signaled each other that the
being logic. In essence, the Mediterranean receives a continual influx
nutmeg tree where I caught it. See, Ned my friend, see the monstrous
me. The Nautilus’s chief officer supervised us.
the Pacific high seas in the belief it was hunting some powerful
I took one last look at the natural wonders and artistic treasures
stopped by insurmountable obstacles. The converging inside walls
out of water for a good while.
long hours and scale a mountain. The roads aren’t terribly well kept
a rifle.”
crab raced around with matchless agility, while green turtles from the
rows of sharp teeth, would flicker out from between these genuine
seemingly head toward us? I’m unable to say.
clusters of weeds that obstruct the mouths of tropical rivers.
wasn’t sure he would succeed. I hoped so, since the poor devil hadn’t
the windows you could see their enormous mouths paved with teeth,
first hours of daylight, a painful, sickly slumber. Waking up, I saw
“Drunk?”
muzzle but on its topside. Then it gathered itself and sprang at us.
some ship? That man now buried in the coral cemetery, wasn’t he the
on the continents.
I’m sure that Captain Nemo expected no replies from me, and it seemed
glee may easily be imagined.
lit by the beacon’s rays.
finally out of this cell.
that I have to admit it. Nobody has ever seen the like. But this sight
“The Nautilus is not aground, sir,” Captain Nemo replied icily. “The
impatience grew until, on June 2, word came that the Tampico, a
soaring aloft, the arrangement of their long feathers causing them to
as to poison the springs where these fowl habitually drink. But in our
legitimate silver, bastard white, or bastard black, and these are
weight had been lifted from me, and I was able to resume my regular
sodium is consumed, and the sea itself gives me that. Beyond this,
give up his escape plans, much to his distress. Swept along at the
minutes we’re sure to be assaulted by several hundred savages.”
three species unique to these southernmost seas: the bowhead whale (or
these cod mountain fish. While the Nautilus was clearing a path
A Mass Execution
footsteps on the platform. Yet there were no rolling movements to
“How could a whale fisherman forget his old trade, sir? Who could ever
The frigate’s interior accommodations complemented its nautical
into the distance; as if he could probe your very soul; as if he could
woman, halfway out of a skylight on the afterdeck, holding a child in
While cruising along only a few cable lengths from the underpinning of
preferable because it spares the polypary’s tissue, leaving it with a
Professor Aronnax,” Ned Land said, still hanging on to his
word requiem.
more than one kilogram per square centimeter, your 17,000 square
We were seated on the platform next to a tranquil sea. The month of
reaching latitude 64 degrees south and discovering the South Shetland
suffered a collision that cracked one of the engine levers, and it
concussion of the brain had occurred. The sick man’s breathing was
For a fare of twenty francs, the vehicle went down Broadway to Union
METER Roughly 1 yard, 3 inches
finally concluded that it belonged to the branch Vertebrata, class
seven millimeters thick were seen to resist a pressure of sixteen
with a dozen crewmen following, we set foot on the firm seafloor where
up so quickly! We aren’t in a kettle yet!”
“Yes, professor, the sea supplies all my needs. Sometimes I cast my
which the Church of Saint-Sulpice in Paris has made into two gigantic
“Yes, since those poor fishermen can’t stay long underwater. On his
Meanwhile the mists didn’t clear, and by eleven o’clock the sun still
The next day, February 16, we left this basin, which tallies depths of
already hunted down?”
I detected a controlled irritation in these words. But there was a
“So you understand, sir,” the stranger went on, “that I have a right
Then I began to wonder if this eccentric individual was even on
floor. This was the extent of his equipment. Arriving on the seafloor
“No, Ned.”
told me the number of men it took to operate the Nautilus.
“Even so, Captain Nemo,” I went on, ignoring his ironic turn of
*Author’s Note: A steward is a waiter on board a steamer.
where its oxygen brings life. Their utmost pressure—it has been
translated as within and not upon. The letter N was no doubt the
he reached open plains that were bordered by wonderful forests. Some
the Canadian was sorry that these fishermen couldn’t harpoon our
this core of light.
and in the meantime . . .”
I had to agree that Ned Land was right, and until ships are built to
and certainly impossible for a nation whose every move is under
Near eleven o’clock in the morning, we cut the Tropic of Capricorn on
regulation language, this poor Frenchman had reverted to speaking his
with them. Then, laden with these valuable spoils, the men returned to
“All right, Ned,” I asked the Canadian, “now what do you need?”
“Only,” the captain went on, “I urge you to aim carefully at this
that swayed in a mild breeze. There were mimosas, banyan trees,
Dillon returned to Calcutta. There he was able to interest the Asiatic
Sea.
I was already wondering if Captain Nemo, rash to the point of sheer
“By the way, Professor Aronnax, you aren’t afraid of sharks, are you?”
a pretty stern tone:
1,000-horsepower engines. Its paddle wheels were churning the sea with
with Verne the operative word is “travel,” and some of his best-known
strata and withstand their pressure.”
Mercantile Gazette, the Lloyd’s List, France’s Packetboat and Maritime
with underwater flora. At first this cave looked pitch-black to
other. The wind shifted abruptly to every point on the compass. The
offchance that the animal might be found in these waterways, a
up and took one last look at these immense plains; then his hand
built a new cable that measured 3,400 kilometers, weighed 4,500 metric
quivering claws that stretched forth from crevices in the rock.
studied its habits and lavished on its behalf all the scientific
“Correct, the prize is rightfully yours. But tell me, isn’t that the
species of birds flew and fluttered by the thousands, deafening us
But when we had ascended to an elevation of about 250 feet, we were
are thought to be poisonous; ladyfish that can flutter their eyelids;
in another, two tuna and a sailor in uniform; in yet another, a
of Tempests!
Hystaspes, and probably completed by King Ptolemy II. Strabo saw it
an instant near noon, Captain Nemo took a reasonably accurate sight
From the branch Mollusca, he mentions numerous comb-shaped scallops,
with the dragon devastating the island. Either Commander Farragut
these observations. Were they for the benefit of his fellow man? It
three drops of blood, since they went from sea serpents to the most
in time to 1702. You’re aware of the fact that in those days your King
Captain Nemo said. “So kindly hear me out.”
myself! All the same, I was content simply to put the frigate in a
planet earth, when something happened to remind us of our strange
At noon that day after our position fix, Captain Nemo climbed onto the
fabric whose nature I didn’t recognize. I hurried to change into them,
cetaceans.”
sleep. Conseil did likewise. I didn’t encounter Captain Nemo while
measures the heaviness of the outside air and forecasts changes in the
shadow of some cavity! A thousand specks of light glittered in the
7. The Mediterranean in Forty-Eight Hours
repeat: it isn’t just for myself that I raise this issue. To me,
*Author’s Note: A Bowie knife is a wide-bladed dagger that Americans
As for Captain Nemo, he didn’t appear. Of the other men on board, I
two meters wide, hence even bigger than the one adorning the
When Captain Nemo spoke in this way, he was transfigured, and he
Be that as it may, by the next day the Nautilus had left its home port
“In any event,” Conseil added, “he’s a superman, that Captain Nemo,
Hologymnosus that were nearly denuded of scales but exquisite in
on a uniform hue. We reached a depth of 100 meters, by which point we
for departure began. The last gleams of twilight were melting into
And with that, Captain Nemo left the lounge.
end, and no such end was in sight.
agreement. We couldn’t complain, and moreover the very uniqueness of
movement.
“I can ask him,” I replied, “but he’ll refuse.”
dynamic power of electricity.”
after La Pérouse’s two ships had miscarried on the island’s reefs, the
The Florida Sunderland, England
“Let’s think this over,” I said to myself, “and let’s take our
and my companions followed suit.
of water not only from the Atlantic but from rivers emptying into it;
“I’ve given orders to open the hatches.”
these were seals. They formed distinct male-and-female groups, the
work. In the library I often found books he had left open, especially
I hope so. I likewise hope that his powerful submersible has defeated
in shape, glassy in luster, and formed from mother-of-pearl; for
with propeller in reverse, but the Nautilus went with the torrent, as
the door cautiously, but as it swung on its hinges, it seemed to make
deep estuary when the Red Sea stretched as far as the Bitter
involuntary convulsion.
Nautilus, about ten meters away, there rose dazzling walls of
truly crafty baleen whale or an exceptionally astute sperm whale to
refrained from mentioning it, and I simply answered that my companions
on board for my pleasure! As for you, Professor Aronnax, you’re a man
or boredom.
“Let’s not exaggerate, Mr. Land,” I went on. “We have nothing to fear
assumed that no crewmen would be assigned to us, that Ned Land would
This bird belonged to the finest of the eight species credited to
band, always heading forward without hesitation. I noted that we
looked like they were at anchor by some immense, open, offshore
valiant Nautilus, and in four days we’ll know where we stand on these
Solomon Islands, and they perished with all hands on the westerly
“All the more reason to get to know them,” Conseil answered.
with a little gelatin protein; and finally, for naturalists it’s a
Gambier group, which is a French protectorate. These islands are coral
I didn’t expect to find this electric cable in mint condition, as it
parts by the horizon.
sheet-iron, hermetically sealed cell. And if the strange commander of
In the midst of the stone mazes furrowing this Atlantic seafloor,
Arriving at the topmost ridge of this promontory, I could see vast
her head, and the poor little creature’s arms were still twined around
that our comparatively moderate speed reached twelve miles per
incalculable. There also were other peculiarities I couldn’t make
“Conseil!” I called a third time.
series of bony fish I observed: eels belonging to the genus
the resulting noises spread under the waters with frightful intensity,
“Go ahead, sir.”
astronomical observations. Then, his operations finished, he went and
musical chords. What was the secret behind this underwater navigating,
countercurrent. It advanced swiftly through this narrow
that the passing years could never weaken it.
sailors. Captain Nemo and my two companions suited up as well. None of
These algae are a genuine prodigy of creation, one of the wonders of
Verne furnishes the most evocative portrayal of the ocean depths
Black Current.
nearly perishes in the Antarctic and Nemo sinks into a growing
“Be seated,” he told me, “and eat like the famished man you must be.”
blooms in every part of this ocean, an element fatal to man, they say,
I repeat: the dynamic power of my engines is nearly infinite. The
seemed to be lit up from underneath. This was no mere phosphorescent
unique color of its waters.”
come. In the middle of the Pacific, tiny infusoria build continents,
corpse. Like the moon, which long ago lost its vital heat, our globe
surprise. “Well, professor, we have good reason to know it because
the water that had sprayed over him from another shell. “With all due
serious consequences. At first, I must say, events seemed to confirm
another, stopping suddenly, putting on steam and reversing engines in
“His bankers?”
Nightfall didn’t interrupt my observations. I was left to
sights were possible. Then how could we tell whether we had reached
“Well, sir?” Ned Land said to me, coming up after the captain’s
Ceylon and the Singhalese by H. C. Sirr, Esq. Reentering the lounge, I
scarlet bumps, carniaira snails with backward-curving tips that make
see! And how many times I shared the excitement of general staff and
when it was filled with boiling lava, and the level of that
honor. No promises fetter us. We’re simply captives, prisoners
midocean. There our Nautilus was completed by me and my workmen, in
understand the importance of this maritime transportation company,
“And these are some new breed of sounding line?”
largely approving.
slopes of this mountain, crossed this entire immense continent, which
other, more numerous glass cases in which were classified specimens
torn between my desire to regain my free will and my regret at
boat, the latter moves horizontally. If they slant, the Nautilus
the class Crustacea through an examination of its stomatopods,
with a swiftness I could estimate at no less than thirty miles per
Some magic lay behind this dazzling sight! Perhaps some atmospheric
absolutely identical species of fish: eels, butterfish, greenfish,
approached the grave, sank again on bended knee, and extended their
sometimes contradicted my theories and formulations. But the captain
when someone can’t go any farther, he still has the option of
phantasmagoric appearance. As for the first subgenus, it furnished
“In that case, captain,” Conseil said in all seriousness, “on the
I thanked the captain and went to look for my two companions, who
the Nautilus in works of vengeance! That night in the middle of the
In fact, I had already resorted to speeding up my inhalations in order
He went on with the conversation as follows:
Professor Aronnax, you’ll stay in the library two steps away and wait
curves, and the play of their colors allured and delighted the eye. I
their light was increased by those glimmers unique to medusas,
resembling the fan shapes of cactus. I observed that green-colored
The harpooner stared at me awhile before replying, slapped his broad
question.
The Nautilus passed over these lush, luxuriant depths with tremendous
Scilly Islands, which it left behind to starboard.
Guided by his skillful hands, the Nautilus passed by all these
me. Several times, during various lulls of wind and sea, I thought I
water surrounding me was just a kind of air, denser than the
But as unemotional as he was, he couldn’t have been more impeccably
exist.”
great illuminating capacity. The edge of its light swept over the sea
alarm. My imagination magnified this sensation. The feeling became so
stenorhynchus, three meters long, with white hair, bulldog heads, and
astern of this strange submersible—whose drive mechanism was obviously
glass cases. I also investigated the huge plant albums that were
I was convinced that when Captain Nemo reached this point, he would
workday, just riding with the waves? This was our chance, and
a pleasant change of pace from our standard fare.
fast along its wharves, and those bigger vessels whose draft of water
Kameni. So it’s obvious that Nea and Palea will join in days to
freely.”
its nose at me! It knows I can’t do a blessed thing to it!”
long while before you tire of the sights constantly before your
Est in Carpathio Neptuni gurgite vates
special creations.”
for departure with sacrifices to placate the gods, and after
noticed that he touched only its black keys, which gave his melodies a
Captain Nemo led me to the Nautilus’s stern and invited me into a
Nautilus was suddenly transferred into broad daylight. At first I
cruising abreast of Long Island, a few miles from the narrows to Upper
On this note I was about to withdraw; but Captain Nemo detained me and
By then it was 9:30. I held my head in both hands to keep it from
three of her kingdoms, mineral, vegetable, and animal. The last of
croakers didn’t serenade us as we passed.
America to Europe in 32/100 of a second. This cable will no doubt last
told me:
Moquin-Tandon, and others.”
great speed. All the tranquil glimmers of the ice walls had then
The Canadian and I sat him up; we massaged his contracted arms, and
operation. But I held no hopes that the sun would make an appearance
on board. My diving suit removed, I went with him to the lounge.
I left the captain in the dying man’s cabin and I repaired to my
face, “I recall perfectly seeing a large boat dragged under the waves
“One proceeds in several ways, and often when pearls stick to the
the Nautilus.
single instant. The Nautilus cruised beneath the waters almost
his free will, craves such an opportunity; but the scientist, forever
floes, some moving icebergs; a sea stretching into the distance; hosts
“As for those billions of tiny animals,” he went on, “those infusoria
wind like light sails. I could see perfectly their undulating,
as oblivious as if they were deaf and blind, leap right into the
Ned Land was on familiar terms with this fruit. He had already eaten
speak, over the whole left side of its frame, with good eyesight only
me if I assert that at this thirty-foot depth, I could see as if it
oceanic birds of paradise that ancient Romans bought for as much as
sort of brilliant twilight over the area, making inordinately long
What was irritating this mollusk? No doubt the presence of the
certain, and any doubting Thomas was invited to place his finger on
narwhale.
slow down, and then it would glide into the narrow channels between
“Ha!” Ned Land exclaimed. “During our stroll tomorrow, who says we
full story about the Nautilus!”
Pierre Aronnax
“But I was all set to tie the knot, Conseil,” the Canadian replied in
I didn’t disturb his meditations but continued to pass in review the
Nautilus’s interior, informing me that we had returned to the surface
“They’d need to be manufactured,” Ned Land replied, “from sheet-iron
shining with a bright silver glow; Guaranian mackerel furnished with
lance, as certain naturalists have expressed it. It’s a king-sized
depth of 6,000 meters. Our submergence had been going on for an
the Shannon and the Helvetia were of smaller dimensions, although each
people is now so clogged with sand, camels can barely get their legs
deep in the jungle.
companions and I rest in no other!”
with triangular heads, bluish flounder without scales, toadfish
didn’t follow the same path in returning to the Nautilus. This new
than decreases with depth, that the pressure in these lower strata
legends in matters of natural history! Besides, when it’s an issue of
school of triggerfish with flat bodies, grainy skins, armed with
strata where we now lie on our side.”
five-meter tiger sharks that insisted on personally provoking him. But
The skiff pulled clear, and carried off by its six oars, it headed
The engineer was summoned once again.
blunder? Flora and fauna are so closely associated in the underwater
parallel with its coastline, and its volcanoes, crowned by Mauna Kea,
continents. It doesn’t fear heavily traveled seas. Who can say it
that didn’t burn, I could see swift, elegant porpoises, the tireless
of columns that supported the springings of this immense vault, a
luster of its pelt guaranteed that it would go for at least 2,000
don’t put it to good use? Do you think I’m unaware of the suffering
Island, and there I chiefly noted the seedless variety that in
by the currents like a huge, wide-open shawl. Other rays passed by so
mind. I understood. The marvelous talents of his Nautilus would be put
venus shells that are among the clams so abundant off the coasts of
nests, egg-laying burrows from which numerous birds emerged. Later
very own one-gun salute.”
no less unusual: melita coral, rainbow coral with jointed outgrowths,
those waves and for a good while seemed imbued with the hazy glow of
“Is the dugong dangerous to attack?” I asked, despite the Canadian’s
dreadful intensity in my mind, and fired by my imagination, I felt an
foolhardy. But to overcome all the obstacles around the South
Paralyzed, rigid with anguish, my hair standing on end, my eyes
had been Finis Poloniae;* Markos Botzaris, for modern Greece the
6,000 leagues across the Pacific!
curiosities that enriched this lounge.
cascades into the heart of the liquid mass. So situated, this volcano
faded. Here and there chrysanthemums sprouted timidly at the feet of
What had he seen? Then, lord knows why, the thought of the monster
would have thought he was waiting for the right moment to jump
the Atlantic Ocean, and the Pacific Ocean.
Ceylon, the Arabic tunnel, the fires of Santorini, those millions in
our voyage. So, Professor Aronnax, if you’d like to explore this
THE ATLANTIC! A vast expanse of water whose surface area is 25,000,000
to his Nautilus. He pressed a metal button and at once the propeller
position was marked at longitude 16 degrees 17’ and latitude 33
disentangled but was barely put to use. It was navigating at
enthusiast who could run with acrobatic agility up and down the whole
The wind was blowing from the southwest, initially a stiff breeze, in
our hearts could beat with yours, moved by some of your griefs or
proper tension. In the Rouquayrol device that has been in general use,
there raced legions of clumsy articulates, in particular some fanged
Mr. Land.”
courtesy. But after all, what would I have said to him? Ned Land was
abroad, his manservant Conseil, and Ned Land, a harpooner of Canadian
carefully observed the watery mass. For what purpose? I hadn’t a
“On the contrary, sir, with this rifle every shot is fatal; and as
Meanwhile the reddish light guiding us had expanded and inflamed the
impact raced through my brain! I didn’t want to see what my eyes saw!
“Yes, professor. Does that amaze you?”
Canadian banged a table with his fearsome fist. Conseil kept still. I
Ruhmkorff device.
those sheets of water had been violently churned. The site’s exact
pilothouse.
extinct one by one; the heat inside the earth is growing weaker, the
“The very noise, sir, but this one’s way louder. So there can be no
from the fevers raging on these unsanitary shores, and quite ill
and unknown, living in the faint hope that someday I can pass on to
nettles that ooze a corrosive liquid. Among the articulates there were
No, because the new moon was barely two days old and was still lost
From that day forward, who knows where the Nautilus took us in the
felt them. No more than the collisions it caused. One sperm whale
obviously missed his meaning. But the captain was right. Thanks to the
share in these daily observations. Our frigate would have had
It was a horrible wound. The cranium had been smashed open by some
be a temperature common to all latitudes.
old as the ancients. They’ve existed for 2,000 or 3,000 years, and I
“Leave master behind?” he replied. “Never! I’ll drown before he does!”
I mused on all the consequences of this situation. Captain Nemo didn’t
Naturally enough, the Canadian wanted to lay in a supply of honey, and
belonging to the vertebrate branch like baleen whales, sperm whales,
ready to withdraw.
crabs aiming their bodies like cannons on their carriages, and hideous
Then we arrived at a cell located within easy access of the engine
island, either one of the Canaries or one of the Cape Verde
species frequenting the Malabar coast moved sluggishly among the
business; and to sight it called for encountering it—which was a
were successively visited by Don Jorge de Meneses in 1526, by Juan de
nets stayed in our wake for several hours, incarcerating an entire
myself, I was glad to oblige, and we stretched out beneath an arbor of
chances by fifty percent, had an excellent shot at winning the prize.
managed to stow some provisions inside. I’ve gotten hold of a monkey
staying in the strainers with twenty to eighty holes are in the first
conversation might still be possible! Already I no longer felt the
held my hand, he kept encouraging me, and I even heard him mutter:
costume and was ready as soon as his fellow workers. Each of them
four-kilogram conical projectile an average distance of sixteen
Gulf of Aden, a genuine funnel stuck into the neck of Bab el Mandeb
“Then it’s an air gun?”
“Very easily.”
in its full expanse. The ship’s beacon lit up that whole placid
since local evaporation isn’t enough to restore the balance, the total
beacon suddenly went on, and its intense brightness made that hazy
with fleshy edges. These were suckerfish from the third family of the
to the core. You talk way off in the future: ‘We’ll be here, we’ll be
“Aye, sir,” the engineer replied.
“There, sir, all under control!” he told me after a few moments. “The
hull. I heard its plating grind against the limestone roughness of
equipment. This force is electricity.”
went here, there, and everywhere in perfect contentment. Moreover, he
could reach you in the heart of a volcano? But don’t I see an opening
the midst of the luminous air.
“Conseil my friend,” Ned replied in all seriousness, “parrots are like
rigging and indicated that its furnaces were pushed to the
covered with six-inch armor plate!”
This prospect seemed increasingly painful to me because, even though
refraction as though passing through a prism; and when this light came
But our circumstances were no less dreadful. Perhaps they hadn’t seen
cetaceans, and sugar from the huge fucus plants in the North Sea; and
“Ye gods,” Conseil said, “it’s fortunate that Ned Land didn’t come
vent that let in a fresh current of oxygen, renewing the thin air in
Nautilus. Here, as in the lounge, I always have them before my eyes,
wanted to make demands only on the sea itself for the sources of my
success.
live coals will be a nice change from our standard fare.”
have divided without fail into tubifex worms and dorsibranchian
the long peninsula that forms New York City.
Now then, although the latter hypothesis was completely admissible, it
which I could follow. Its content was the same, but the form
of the future. Captain Nemo no longer appeared, neither in the lounge
seconds before rowing again, following the practice used in most
lounge, whose ceiling lights were on. The furniture had been knocked
continuously by the sun’s oblique rays, or were completely swallowed
will someday connect these islands to each other. Later on, this new
living man must probe, the secret of my entire existence! Do you think
they’re the true builders of limestone continents! And so, after
like semispheric capsules. Sometimes these suckers fastened onto the
volcano. Fifty feet below its peak, amid a shower of stones and slag,
blowing a strong gust, and the furious billows would not allow us to
“You’re right, Conseil, it turned out to be a foolish business after
of prayer, as did all the friends of him who had loved them. . . . My
showing bluish backs with small brown spots; they resemble sharks,
didn’t want my new and unusual research to be buried with my bones. I
so we didn’t capsize. Clinging to the stempost, Ned Land thrust his
abundant along Mediterranean beaches, attaches itself to rocks. In
degree. Yawns dislocated my jaws. My lungs were gasping in their quest
Captain Nemo.
As for me, I was hardly drawn by the lure of money and yet was far
proceeded to smoke the bees out. Little by little the buzzing died
“An enormous block of ice, an entire mountain, has toppled over,” he
the waters. Where was it going? North or south? Where would the man
the captain’s way of life, his Nautilus isn’t simply a ship. It’s
minimum daily requirement for nitrogen.
“And now he rests beside his companions in that coral cemetery?”
Just then a hollow explosion was audible. I looked at the captain. The
facing the island of Vanikoro proper, to which Captain Dumont
satisfaction, I must say, of assorted sharks. While the Abraham
“With all due respect to master, this we must see.”
Charles X.
complaints. But if it gets the urge to dive, I wouldn’t give $2.00 for
devastates these wonderful countries. This toxic vegetation has
habitually hardworking, rarely startled by life’s surprises, very
initial of the name of that mystifying individual in command beneath
meters of water, and that Admiral McClintock, England’s hero of the
Its fishing finished, the Nautilus drew nearer to the coast. In this
aware that my death throes had begun. I realized that I was about to
Bank at the South Pole, we had never felt better, neither Ned,
“Where, may I ask?”
a hole cut in the trunk of a dragon tree, there swarmed thousands of
The enormous vessel settled slowly. Following it down, the Nautilus
condition couldn’t have quoted a syllable of his own country’s
attached to a pump that sends him air through an india-rubber hose;
eelpout, a type of emerald moray whose flavor is excellent, wolffish
The present translation is a faithful yet communicative rendering of
There, all about us, I swear that the shores and ice floes were
research. During those two days of April 11-12, the Nautilus didn’t
pheasant to people with nothing else on their plates.”
“Oh, sir, sir! Will you help me!”
“Yes, sir,” the captain replied, “and if I have no hesitation in
“Then I daren’t delay,” Conseil replied. “The hunt is on! We
Admiral Bruni d’Entrecasteaux. Two months later, testimony from a
traveling backward with tremendous speed in the same direction as the
ice. It was a dazzling mine of gems, in particular sapphires and
them from our trawl.
brought in by harvesting these banks of pearl oysters?”
that announced some struggle of the elements far below, others have
I mean the breadfruit tree, which is quite abundant on Gueboroa
So it is here, among these gallant people who have taken us in, that
men over twenty-four hours.”
Ned Land still kept up the most tenacious skepticism; beyond his
sparks. Amid these shrubs of precious coral, I observed other polyps
toward Tound Island and the Bad Channel.
accented with bright colors.
water.
45’ on February 21. In 1838 the Frenchman Dumont d’Urville stopped at
enough not to hamper its movements, and to this ring a long rope whose
over which the sea burst into foam. The Nautilus stayed on the surface
The situation was indeed dangerous, but as if by magic, the Nautilus
The captain understood and gave me a signal to follow him. We returned
bodily surface?”
in these southern seas, a baleen whale rushed at the Essex and pushed
little by little, the Nautilus hadn’t settled to the lower strata! Its
stern and opened into the officers’ mess.
blood-soaked linen, his head was resting on a folded pillow. I undid
The first cable was put down during the years 1857-1858; but after
and directing maneuvers myself. And now if you’ll kindly go below,
Mr. Charles Darwin, who thus explains the formation of atolls—a theory
natives were a threat to his Nautilus, the captain answered me with
“Could you quote them to me, so I can double-check them as the need
paid it frequent visits.
modulated to the southwest. Our prow pointed to the Indian
picturesque pile of rocks whose smooth heights were completely hung
locality that it had some trouble finding. At noon Captain Nemo
efficiency of the Nautilus.
toward the south Atlantic!
distinguished our voyage. I saw little of the captain. He was at
the very sight of it aroused his appetite, and he couldn’t control
I opened it impatiently. It was written in a script that was clear and
Conseil had said the true word.
opaque mists! How many collisions have occurred with these reefs,
with all hands. And even the Nautilus, rising superior to every danger
victim of some collision caused by the Nautilus? Yes, I repeat: this
observe.
dishes, dessert. But where’s the soup course? Where’s the roast?”
trickle of water that, after carrying sustenance to each cell, was
“Fire and brimstone, it’s hailing!” Conseil said. “And poisoned hail
oppressors! Thanks to them, I’ve witnessed the destruction of
to ship the whole menagerie to France.”
good, but Captain Nemo, guided by his instincts, discovered new
shepherd who guarded King Neptune’s immense flocks. To be specific,
ship, and for an instant I could read the board on its stern:
“Why not?” Conseil replied. “We sincerely believed in master’s
what I saw was simply a reflection produced by the crystal waters of
forgotten. Without getting into those rumors that upset civilians in
DURING THE DAY of January 29, the island of Ceylon disappeared below
powerful voice. “And I don’t need your colors to recognize you! Look!
would maneuver I hadn’t a guess. I repaired to my stateroom. The
bluish backs plus brown pectorals trimmed in gray piping, a species of
South Seas in Melanesia, the strait in which sloops of war under
daunting shoal where Captain Cook’s ships wellnigh miscarried on June
words, a direct hit to the heart. In its struggles the man-eater
boarding axes. Conseil and I picked up two more axes. Ned Land seized
those madrepores that my mentor Professor Milne-Edwards has so
these chasms, but I walked along with a firm tread and without the
“Not only on their size,” I replied, “but also according to their
Off the Falkland Islands on June 30, the frigate came in contact with
I reentered my stateroom, where Ned and Conseil were waiting
verticillatus, peacock’s tails, fig-leafed caulerpa, grain-bearing
other marine animals. The flesh of these turtles was nothing
the black race, John Brown, hanging from his gallows as Victor Hugo’s
about extracting these pearls?”
condition. Your word that you’ll submit to it will be sufficient.”
substance lining the insides of their valves.”
areas! A magnificent plain of waves plowed continuously by ships of
request. The liquid setting, electrically lit, unfolded with perfect
21. Some Days Ashore
long ago harbored merchant vessels and triple-tiered war galleys on
During this crossing, the sea continually lavished us with the most
“Well?” Captain Nemo went on. “Did you hear my question? Do you know
animal’s track, sweeping in a long curve.
settled there, plied a course toward Vanikoro, raised it on February
cannonading the same.”
silica. Then we crossed a prairie of algae, open-sea plants that the
speed.
I’m unable to estimate the hours that passed in this way. But I was
voyage to Ceylon, the Englishman Percival made much of a Kaffir who
tempted to gather their fresh petals, which were adorned with delicate
- DECIMETER Roughly 4 inches
authors—more artistic than scientific—claim that these fish are
“Now, Ned, we’re all ears,” I said. “What have you to tell us?”
As I said, Commander Farragut had carefully equipped his ship with all
And he slipped an open clasp knife under my clothes, slitting them
heard him murmur these words, the last of his to reach my ears:
No sooner had I voiced this regret than I felt it must have wounded
At eight o’clock, armed with rifles and axes, we pulled clear of the
jelly equipped with a threadlike tentacle, up to 25,000 of which have
this compartment didn’t contain the boilers, because their furnaces
I stayed in my stateroom. I dressed warmly: fishing boots, otter cap,
It was obvious that the matter had to be settled, and evasions were
rays pierced the cloud curtain gathered on the easterly horizon, and
groove where the butt was heaviest, a cartridge clip held some twenty
it had appeared in the course of 1865, I concluded that the fitting
surface area measures 1,625 square leagues, is governed by
just keep on believing in the existence of some enormous cetacean
“Professor Aronnax,” he told me in a tone of some urgency, “I ask that
“Well, professor! What think you?”
me:
our eyes were suddenly spirited from utter darkness into blinding
commander of this vessel.”
Gorgonaria, which contains three groups: sea fans, isidian polyps, and
“From the earth?” I said, my voice going up on the word.
shorn of its masts, which must have sunk bow first. This casualty
their rotational and orbital movements, stars and their satellites go
Berthelot, Father Secchi, Petermann, Commander Maury, Louis Agassiz,
life. Not only had he placed himself beyond human laws, he had
Captain Nemo took me to the central companionway whose steps led to
and sleep in peace.”
floating next to an embankment shaped like a wharf. As for the water
any stress or strain. Then we returned to the locality where the 1863
No one is unaware of the name of that famous English shipowner,
magnificent bustards. To say he risked his life twenty times in order
into its copper capsule, I commented on this to the captain.
“But then,” I said, “does this contraption contain some sort of
attract certain dangerous occupants of these waterways.”
head east. It did not.
companions had slept serenely, utterly unaware of the Nautilus’s feat.
extensive accumulation of organic waste brought either from the
“In the Mediterranean!” I exclaimed.
“A man! A castaway!” I exclaimed. “We must rescue him at all cost!”
bellowing?”
“Master may recall,” Conseil then said, “that we have some experience
Black Current: heated by perpendicular rays from the tropical sun, it
captain had added.
neat but a bit “Old English” in style, its characters reminding me of
escape plans. He had become less sociable, almost sullen. I could see
at the window and examining anew the crevices in the cliff.
“Captain!” I went on, touching him with my hand.
to the Nautilus, Captain Nemo continued his daring excursion.
After a fairly long silence, the commander went on with our
transoceanic travel. The industrial and commercial newspapers dealt
they undergo must be assessed in billions of kilograms. Calculate,
o’clock in the morning, I observed that we encountered the Ice Bank’s
follows below. I remember it because, every morning, it was repeated
forty-eight hours of work. The air couldn’t be renewed in the
5. Arabian Tunnel
simply, I utilize the heat of coal from the earth.”
this man? Is he the persecutor or the persecuted? And in all honesty,
those timid estimates that gave the object a length of 200 feet, and
kingdom’s only representatives inside this volcano. Here and in the
badly needing a rest. I wanted nothing more than to see my country
observations to you.”
with which they back up their beliefs. When fishermen first hunted
ship’s electric outpourings. We were separated from the sea by two
an island than an animal. There’s also the story of how the Bishop of
We couldn’t have been luckier in our search for edible vegetation, and
dressing the poor man’s wound, I redid the linen bandages around his
cuttlefish. French fishermen give them the name “cuckoldfish,” and
“An artistic explanation, Captain Nemo,” I replied, “but I’m unable to
the surface area and volume of the Nautilus. Its surface area totals
other words, by my gallant companions whom I’ve molded and
adequate protection against their attacks. Such thoughts hadn’t
“I won’t argue with you,” Ned Land answered. “But dinner or breakfast,
centigrade. The injections couldn’t get it to go a single degree
Auber, Gounod, Victor Massé, and a number of others scattered over a
meters long and proportionate in bulk live at such depths, their
hour. The Nautilus slid downward on its slanting fins, still
Never! By keeping you on board, it isn’t you whom I care for, it’s
an average depth of 1,500 to 2,000 meters, and that with a view to
was instantly set in motion, and the log gave our speed as twenty
bone is firmly attached to the side of the intermaxillary that forms
platform. The morning shadows were lifting. The island was soon on
crew all by himself. I can do no better than to compare him with a
learn how you’ll be lodged aboard the Nautilus.”
its flesh but found it tasteless, despite Conseil’s views, which were
origin aboard the Abraham Lincoln, a frigate in the national navy of
this Nautilus?”
that he hadn’t strolled across the Vigo battlefield on his own behalf.
“Many explanations exist on the subject, Professor Aronnax. Would you
But one question, perhaps indiscreet, naturally popped up, and I
“Correct, my scholarly Conseil. Now then, those Testacea capable of
all seriousness, “doesn’t mean they don’t indulge from time to
“He won’t turn down your assistance. Come along, Ned.”
gestation. Verne and Hetzel were in constant conflict and the book
Followed by Captain Nemo, I climbed onto the platform, and from there
and driven its dreadful point into the shark’s underside.
I realized, moreover, that Ned Land’s brooding was getting him madder
So our salvation lay totally in the hands of the mysterious helmsmen
“So-so, just so-so!” Ned Land replied.
than their northern relatives, they posted no sentinels on guard duty
The Canadian, Conseil, and I could only obey. Some fifteen of the
In fact, that blackish object was soon only a mile away from us. It
sink a frigate as easily as a walnut shell! There was good reason to
me. “We won’t be going very deep, and the sun’s rays will be
A few paces away, a monstrous, meter-high sea spider was staring at me
simultaneously staked it off at several points around its
speed. My companions and I had no time to collect ourselves. I don’t
by layers of nimbocumulus. Other low clouds fled swiftly. The sea grew
And by now I would have classified master’s fossils. And master’s
the shores of Asia? Would he pull nearer to the beaches of Europe?
discover this passageway, and I alone am familiar with it. I’d noted
atmosphere; the storm glass, whose mixture decomposes to foretell the
proved.
series of petrels, some whitish with wings trimmed in brown, others
Not one star was twinkling, and nighttime is never so utterly black.
disbelief.
resident again of these shores you avoid!”
depth of 360 meters.
clamor and furious shouts resounded outside.
view. And besides, how could this poor Indian ever have guessed that
folk tales; the country whose reality has nevertheless been accepted
This current swept along with it a whole host of moving
with human beings.”
follows the angle of that slant and, under its propeller’s thrust,
general effect of these smooth rocks is indescribable: black,
utterly fictitious—pages.* I told the lad about the wars of these
I rejoined Ned and Conseil.
“In its appointed time. Meanwhile there’s nothing we can do about it,
rescue work. But when I returned on board, I mentioned this serious
Cladostephus with the slenderest foliage, Rhodymenia palmata
of water, hence at about one kilogram per each square centimeter?”
to see in every direction.
moonlike opahs that look like azure disks but which the sun’s rays
“Here they come. To my thinking, Professor Aronnax, this ‘Red Sea’
“It was 500,000,000 francs,” Captain Nemo replied, “but no more!”
corrected the sun’s refraction by means of a mirror, and he used it to
some conditions are no longer hazardous that offered all sorts of
I’ll have the pleasure of explaining their functions to you. But
around me, and in a few moments the cell was completely empty. The
meat, and it was warmly welcomed. Ned Land proved himself quite
“All right, Ned, let’s wait and see!” I replied. “It’s clear that
clean through.”
instincts, Ned Land greedily stuffed the finest of these mollusks into
Nothing had changed in its interior arrangements. The prison was still
the platform. One carried a harpoon and line similar to those used in
into the woods on some harmless fox hunt!
shoulders. “But speaking for myself, I’ll never get into those things
“Yes, my boy,” I replied.
use up more than you’d make!”
Pole. Although this feat is fictitious, it will someday come true,
in the air tanks for only two days.”
dived down to assess the damage. Within moments they had located a
textile material enclosed in a metal sheath. The Great Eastern put
“A hunting trip!” Ned exclaimed.
of Capricorn, and the Strait of Magellan opened less than 700 miles to
So, having concluded that our sole chance for salvation lay in being
half every year! If it were fully landlocked like a lake, this odd
monster again became an islet, rock, or reef, but a runaway reef,
and on April 4 we lay abreast of Uruguay, albeit fifty miles
flying no flag. But I’ll swear it’s a warship, because there’s a long
Gymnotus fasciatus that passed like elusive wisps of steam, conger
“Let’s wait and see,” Conseil said. “The Nautilus is heading that
gradients. But in grappling with them, we had to venture up difficult
variety of coral, and in short, every species of these unusual
places they earn only a penny for each oyster that has a pearl, and
come to full bloom. It loses its speed and temperature, but it turns
As I said, the Nautilus veered to the east. To be more accurate, I
cannibals! I wouldn’t be surprised if they were, but believe you me,
“To six and a half atmospheres.”
my post in the lounge. The electric log indicated that the Nautilus
sea with such power. An immense wake of glowing whiteness marked the
torn open, funnel bent, paddle wheels stripped to the mountings,
Professor Aronnax. You, if not your companions, won’t perhaps complain
“Yes!” I said. “But what can we do?”
Suddenly a noise from the ship’s interior became audible. Voices were
membrane-filled bodies whose heads are formed from two rounded
vocabulary: class Gastropoda, family Buccinoidea, genus cowry, species
time. Hunting otters in underwater forests, as we did in the forests
“Fine,” I replied, “but the Nautilus lives in a separate world, and
“Through nature’s unpredictability, not man’s incapacity. No errors
starts below Suez and leads to the Bay of Pelusium.”
stronger; and the refraction of the sun, already low on the horizon,
But this mystery would inevitably be cleared up, and soon, because
best spyglasses were unable to pierce it. The outcome: disappointment
accompanying noise. Indeed, we had “struck bottom,” to use nautical
Nautilus’s pumps continually injected streams of boiling water into
familiar. What’s wrong, Ned my friend? Are you tired of this voyage
of sleep, I fell into a heavy doze. I dreamed—one doesn’t choose his
families are subdivided into genera, subgenera, species, varieties—”
depopulated of whales and seals. By then, crowded with jellyfish,
honesty, shipboard conditions became life-threatening. Hearts were
Rouquayrol device went into operation as soon as it was in position,
journal, an article by its most popular columnist finished off the
beacon. I then examined the fittings of this mechanism, whose power
So I summoned Conseil, who brought me a small, light dragnet similar
I thought I hadn’t heard him right, but I couldn’t repeat my comment
the captain’s collection, I estimated that it was worth at least
These last words were cowardly of me; but as far as I could, I wanted
“No, Professor Aronnax, the Nautilus isn’t consigned to perdition. It
simple mollusk. It seemed to me that this cave made up my
to the Caribbean Sea for further saturation with heat particles. Then,
depths. When I want to rise again and lie flush with the surface, all
carapaces, which are covered with big slabs of horn, thin, brown,
Early in the morning on November 11, fresh air poured through the
Maury, who discovered that it has a circulation as real as the
the waves and it headed due north at a speed of fifteen miles per
leather bag at his belt. It was no corpse lost in the waves. It was a
Hatteras once more. There the Gulf Stream is seventy-five miles wide
“Correct. Our electric bullets are ineffective against such soft
craft?”
several specimens of that bizarre fish aptly nicknamed “toadfish,”
of Mexico and New York or Boston, and it was crossed night and day by
walls. I had to rest content with the various specimens of fish
on a couch and picked up a book, which my eyes skimmed mechanically.
afoul of the Scotia, which caused such a great uproar, was the result
us off one day on some remote coast? There lay the unknown. All these
But what a waste of energy! The Abraham Lincoln would change course
We were stretched out in this delightful cave for an hour. Our
IN THE AFTERMATH of this storm, we were thrown back to the east. Away
from those we had already studied in other latitudes. Chief among them
“Wow!” Ned Land exclaimed. “If I were on board a whaler, there’s an
pressure equivalent to that from a 1,000-meter column of water, in
No! My mind was reeling as never before! Never had ideas of such
Pacific.
silver heads and yellow tails, various specimens of salmon, mullet
plumage shaded with pink tints that contrasted with its dark-hued
Malaysia is called “rima.”
CHAPTER 14
deserted.
“Vanikoro.”
“Wooden ships maybe,” the Canadian replied. “But I’ve never seen the
“Ask, professor.”
Ned Land shook his head without replying; then he and Conseil left
CHAPTER 17
“What about my companions, captain?”
my companions and I would leave forever this man I dared not judge.
doze, which until then I had been able to fight off only through the
miles from the coast of Ireland. At around two o’clock in the
of fish.”
From the black markings on the tips of its fins, I recognized the
personal interest in checking on the current condition of this giant
and the public accepted without argument the existence of a prodigious
with much greater ease.”
As Master Wishes
hissing told me that water was entering the ship’s ballast
ocean depths two or three vertical leagues beneath the surface, I use
An interminable debate then broke out between believers and skeptics
positioned on the table cloth, and we sat down to eat. Assuredly, we
silken threads; to the eye delightful jellyfish, to the touch actual
cetacean sank to deeper strata, rose with it when it returned to the
lighting! This light throbbed with unprecedented vigor and activity!
friend would never rest with his companions in the placid waters of
glide noiselessly over this soapy water, as if it were cruising
stern. They examined the ocean with the most scrupulous care. They saw
with seaweed and assorted flat stones.
for residents of the sea, and I could judge for myself from the
indicated by the pressure gauge—would be the same as the outside
brighter. Clouds were fleeing to the south. Mists were rising from the
exactly in the middle of the body.
“I’ll give it a try, professor, though I’m handier with a harpoon than
the splendors of this tropical night. My memories took wing toward
On May 8, while abreast of North Carolina, we were across from Cape
And there we were, climbing these blackish rocks amid sudden
settings and scenery where these reefs and volcanic islands leveled
wonders passing before my eyes, I wouldn’t have been surprised to find
fish, in other words, their tails were straight up, thrashing the
ocean air, the sights in the rich waters beyond the lounge windows,
After four hours of strolling, I was quite astonished not to feel any
were fused to form continents, and finally the earth’s geography
“I’ll quit debating,” I replied, getting up from the table. “And all
a natural curiosity. I was mistaken. Captain Nemo had an explicit
left the ship’s deck. Sometimes bending over the forecastle railings,
monster? I must admit that he flatly didn’t believe in the unicorn,
you’re now crushing me under arguments in its favor.”
commonly known by the name sea loach, which is encountered exclusively
again to its waterline.
science, in particular, represented the major investment of this
telescope fish with its enormous eyes, the armored gurnard with gray
immense. This was the second companion he had lost since we had come
“Did master summon me?” he said, entering.
pulling alongside one of the many boats plying a coastal trade from
propeller was still churning those belonging to the ocean.
and the catastrophe that befell the Egyptians, I would ask if you’ve
outside humanity, beyond all feelings of compassion, the implacable
Dreadful indeed, if, as we could assume, Captain Nemo had been using
muster, fine fat bustards scampered over the slopes. I’ll let the
The Torres Strait
Right now, nothing is clear to me, I still glimpse only glimmers in
some piece of solid ground, or we’ll be dead. So we’re in God’s hands,
we can safely take action.”
hunt? Was your herb gathering a success?”
As for our neglect, our isolation in the depths of this cell, I was
“Thank you, Mr. Land,” he told him.
“With all due respect to master—gracious!” Conseil put in, shaking off
savage swinging a sling just ten meters away from him. I tried to stop
surface. No, if we’re well out and the ship’s navigating under the
and it shouted:
“On the contrary.”
Captain Nemo observed the herd of cetaceans cavorting on the waters a
honor, which we sincerely would have kept. However, this delicate
19. Vanikoro
approach. In this long, blackish object advancing flush with the
Hebrews “the great sea,” to Romans mare nostrum.* Bordered by orange
both day and night, enabling me to scrutinize every point of the
skimmed the edge of the horizon.
I entered. The captain was there. He was bending over his worktable
encountered.
want my visit to Gueboroa Island to cost the life of a single one of
- KILOGRAM (KILO) Roughly 2.2 pounds
from or where he was heading, but more and more I could see a
a fearsome harpoon. He hurled it at those fleshy masses and ran them
don’t know if Conseil was busy with their classification, but as for
scoured the ocean floor and collected every marine exhibit in their
lost in a reverie that I no longer tried to dispel.
surface of the waves.
around me, he used only an odd and utterly incomprehensible dialect.
The frigate approached without making a sound, stopped two cable
had gotten used to the sight of this fascinating fishing when all at
So Ned Land had good reason to worry. In these wide seas empty of
adjusted very nicely to the diet on board.”
this substance was missing on board and nothing else could replace it.
it’s electric, it runs with an accuracy rivaling the finest
companions kept their seats and didn’t move. Soon I threw myself down
in Lacépède’s day, since that pioneering classifier of fish had seen
of circles that had me deeply puzzled. It seemed to be searching for a
with seashell rubble and bristling with foraminifera; a crust of caked
guess.
The escort of boats and tenders still followed the frigate and only
of balance from taking its toll. One may defy human laws, but no one
Ned Land and Conseil stood next to me. We stared, and it dawned on me
And now, what were Ned Land’s views on this question of a marine
with big eyes in a head somewhat resembling a canine’s, viviparous
does appear before our eyes.”
devilfish?”
“But where do we find him?” Ned Land asked.
walls. I recognized some spurges that let their caustic, purgative sap
jump overboard! I can’t stay here any longer! I’m suffocating!”
Mouth and teeth! There’s no better way to describe the long-skulled
After crossing through a moderately dense thicket, we again found some
Captain Nemo inserted his cranium into its spherical headgear. Conseil
“Let such circumstances come, Mr. Land, and we’ll see. But until then,
This short break was a delight. It lacked only the charm of
dealings with some aquatic mammal, until then unknown, that could
hull and is set in a cavity expressly designed to receive it. It’s
use to generate this marvelous force must be depleted very
according to species, within certain seas that they never leave. And
I’ll mention that sodium batteries have been found to generate the
they would have no idea what took place during the night, and to
“Nor I, Ned, until I’ve caught a bird of paradise.”
outlined on the ice, eight meters from our port quarter. Then his men
word on any of this. The day you’re ready, alert us and we’re with
pushed roughly aside. One of the steel plates flew up, a man appeared,
messroom of the general staff; and for certain, if it hadn’t been for
We have no use for whale oil on this ship.”
shores of Asia, and curves into the north Pacific as far as the
end. A wall of superb rocks stood before us, imposing in its sheer
1702. Here, in this very place, those galleons carrying treasure to
noticed as much.
escape. Monstrous waves race together from every point of the
bringing back from Canada.
links day with night in tropical zones, Conseil and I marveled at an
but he didn’t seem to understand me, and the situation grew rather
sun’s rays, which were no longer refracted. The magic of these solar
I gave a yell of despair! Conseil pounced on his rifle and aimed at a
other. The sea was pretty smooth and barely tired us. Sometimes I
shells, obelisk snails, and especially the finest hammer shells I had
“What!” Conseil exclaimed. “They make counterfeit birds of paradise?”
equip me.”
months out of the year. This canal served commerce until the century
of our almost motionless Nautilus, I could see nothing among these
perched on tips of rock. There were sparrow hawks with white bellies,
ruins of steamers, some lying down, others rearing up like fearsome
oarsmen and ten fishermen. The latter divide into two groups, dive in
side, sometimes standing on end like a mast, rolled and pitched
thousand methods were used to spark its interest or rouse it from its
himself.
How long that day seemed, the last I would spend aboard the Nautilus!
head, which has earned these animals the name cephalopod; its arms
the future lives of my companions? Tomorrow, might not Captain Nemo
“Extremely well, my gallant lad,” I replied. “And how about you,
a place among the most farfetched teratological legends.
between latitude 10 degrees and 14 degrees 30’ north, and between
cartilaginous fish closer to the shark, trunkfish known as dromedaries
The crew were waiting impatiently for orders from their leader. The
excitement. “It’s approaching! It’s coming toward us! It’s thumbing
supported by an elegant bronze stand, and I inhaled my first whiffs
the Inman line’s Etna running afoul of the monster, an official report
‘Edrom,’ and if the ancients gave it that name, it was because of the
Ned Land doesn’t mess things up!”
of some European coast.”
make our circumstances even more arduous, and jeopardize the
“Precisely, sir.”
greenery. And if Commander Maury is correct, were one to harness the
“Yes, Conseil.”
leaped forward to intercept the blow. A brother lays down his life for
follow ships into the northernmost seas, sharp-snouted carp exclusive
Him, his conscience if he had one—these were the only judges to whom
Ten days went by in this way. It was only on May 1 that the Nautilus
would go an even greater distance just to stare at such a sight!”
1819 the Russian Bellinghausen lay on the 69th parallel, and in 1821
needed to be given in order to submerge, I had only to take note of
without so much as a voyage canceled, a delay recorded, a man, a
“We’ll try to at least, by cutting through one of these walls
It was obvious these Papuans had already entered into relations with
water plants collect in this placid Atlantic basin, according to the
some inexplicable whim, he decided to brave it out on the surface.
heading. Once it was abreast of Cape Horn, I thought it would strike
the hand of the Creator of All Things.”
Captain Nemo shrugged his shoulders. Then, addressing me:
of arrows burst over us.
white band. English whalers have given this the name “ice blink.” No
“Fish? Rarely!” he answered me. “But given the current state of marine
At first Captain Nemo ate without pronouncing a single word. Then he
me. Besides, Frenchmen, Englishmen, Americans, Danes, and Norwegians
utterly incomprehensible words. Then he seemed to question me directly
“Agreed,” I said. “And steam seems to have killed off all gratitude in
“Oh really?”
torches, fish measuring two meters and boasting white, firm, plump
exhibits from this inexhaustible ocean. But we had to keep walking,
gaze seemed to reflect thinking on an elevated plane, and that the
“Savages!” Captain Nemo replied in an ironic tone. “You set foot on
power. In essence, its light was generated in a vacuum, insuring both
toward a huge bay that made a crescent-shaped incision in the granite
slanting fins drew it to depths of 2,000 and 3,500 meters. There
volcanoes literally inside and out; in the world of commerce, he
such highly appetizing seaweed as the Porphyra laciniata and the
copperwork, held on their wide shelves a large number of uniformly
inspired, Verne created one of literature’s great rebels, a freedom
understood the uselessness of the Ruhmkorff device.
“Oh good! And from what country?”
peaceful night!”
white and was radiating from a mountain peak about 800 feet high. But
dig the Suez Canal. And Verne’s marine engineering proves especially
“Ye gods,” Conseil replied, “I hardly know what to tell master. We’re
humanity have now earned the right to reply. Captain Nemo and I.
from your blood temperature. This Gulf Stream is a huge heat generator
“Even so, captain,” I said, “there is one major similarity between
1774, along the 109th meridian, he reached latitude 71 degrees 15’. In
“Surely, but as I told you, Professor Aronnax, the Nautilus’s pumps
a pressure of 100 atmospheres. If at this point you want to empty the
“Yes, Ned! We’ll escape tonight even if the sea swallows us up!”
had checked our fall. The pressure gauge soon indicated an ascending
the perforating tool of some animal.
skiff roll gently, and a few cresting billows lapped at its bow.
of staring at fish and eating them day in and day out. This shortage
the Scotia’s wound.
feather stars from the genus Asterophyton that were like fine lace
from shipwrecked vessels had been seen on the coast of New
splashes of molten lead. Coming from well out, a mild swell made the
circling it like a wild beast, drawing it eastward, letting it chase
heart was pounding mightily. If the lower half of the sun’s disk
“So it must be a rarity or something?” the Canadian asked, in the tone
by Inigo Ortiz in 1545, by the Dutchman Schouten in 1616, by Nicolas
Captain Nemo moved forward without hesitation. He knew this dark
fins and six-foot broadswords, stalwart animals, plant eaters rather
“Maelstrom! Maelstrom!” they were shouting.
And I’ll mention—for the record—some little banded blennies that
crackle. I soon realized the cause. It was a heavy rainfall rattling
More intense than on land, more abundant, more infinite, such life
facial features recovered their usual icy composure, and turning to
most unusual in this group, which was discovered in 1822 by Captain
fish with fluttering fins brushed past them like flocks of birds. But
the situation.
swore that the monster couldn’t negotiate this passageway simply
mighty opponents. Eight miles to leeward, Professor Aronnax, can you
captain for permission to examine the rifles set aside for us.
have gone without those changes of pace that Ned Land, in a spirit of
that a man’s bearing is the clue to his character, and this stocky
him?
d’Entrecasteaux, two of his subordinate officers, and several seamen
“Would master,” Conseil said to me, “give us some background on pearl
“Oh damnation, yes!” Ned Land shot back. “It’s superb! I’m furious
But nothing binds us to Captain Nemo. He believes that escaping from
rajahs. These aristocrats deem themselves the sons of crocodiles, in
“Well then, captain, how is it that you’ve severed all ties with the
depth of the waters. I then understood the role played by these waves,
thought I did—the submersible sinking toward the sea’s lower
and there.
My two gallant companions stood petrified at the sight of the wonders
these strangers don’t intend to let us die of hunger, otherwise last
“I know,” he told me in that calm tone the most dreadful outlook
“Here we are, Professor Aronnax,” Captain Nemo then said. “You observe
Nautilus to make an appearance on the surface. So it wisely stayed in
atmospheres. This tank is fastened to the back by means of straps,
catch up with them.
might have been the Atlas, lost with all hands some twenty years ago
“To the pole!” I exclaimed, unable to keep back a movement of
were yellowish and gelatinous, just begging to be picked.
that follows such continuous spinning motions. We were in dread, in
“I think as you do, Professor Aronnax,” Captain Nemo replied. “I’ll
Nautilus resumed its usual deep-water speed. From then on, no more
split this ice, the Nautilus was reduced to immobility. Ordinarily,
turbulent, agitated by the winds, demolishing the strongest ships
“A meal is waiting for you in your cabin,” he told them. “Kindly
in them. But as to whether they’re Spaniards, Turks, Arabs, or East
“So,” I said, “all these foods are products of the sea?”
they bring up so many that have none!”
to work once again in this superhuman undertaking!
and was gearing up to classify it in his best manner. But I
“Bah!” Conseil put in.
Treaty of Amiens granted them in 1802.”
covers the beaches. Thus they die in the open air, and by the end of
the bay, since as many as 2,000,000 eggs have been counted in a single
the Mediterranean. But the specific stimulus for this novel was an
appearance. If you want to consign people to oblivion, you don’t light
but who cared about exhaustion, what difference were wounds?
some 600 leagues under the waves of this sea, and this voyage was
escape plans.
I climbed the most impossibly steep gradients with all the nimbleness,
walruses are each divided into species, and if I’m not mistaken, we
meters beneath the surface of the water. Its electric equipment had
figure the Nautilus will lie abreast of Nova Scotia, and from there to
this greenery was sprawling under our steps, it didn’t neglect us
“Whatever it is,” Ned Land went on, “any animal having four feet
tried to peer through the dense gloom, which was broken only by the
thought that our plans might be discovered before we had left the
the Nautilus stayed in the middle of the Atlantic, hustling us along
ones that the Nautilus’s nets most frequently hauled on board: rays,
table, he no longer saw me, he had forgotten my very presence.
like steam into the huge cylinders of a 2,000-horsepower engine.
it be advisable to spare its life, in the interests of science?”
But what were mere winds to this Nautilus, which no storms could
with the latest research on this bizarre zoophyte—which turns to stone
socket. Only four meters were left to be removed. That still meant
“Where are we?” I asked.
Lincoln. All right, we’ll see if it can outrun our conical shells!
here, who went where he wished, who took paths mysterious to others if
man to his stone, took the fellow in his arms, and with a vigorous
In the middle of the clearing, on a pedestal of roughly piled rocks,
mentioned. Then night fell in the midst of a heavy silence
Meanwhile, as the sun got progressively higher, it lit up the watery
“That’s good news,” the Canadian replied, “but where’s the Nautilus
the waves aboard the Nautilus, your heart never fails you! There are
I had no reply to this, and I feared that Captain Nemo wouldn’t take
Just then a noise was audible outside. Footsteps rang on the metal
“I object,” I replied. “We have not fallen into the hands of
crinoids, brittle stars, sea urchins, sea cucumbers, etc., represented
that coral base.
symptoms, suffered the same sufferings, yet never left my side. He
replied. “He has a practical mind and a demanding stomach. He’s tired
fixtures in the ceiling, whose glare was softened and tempered by
Tetrabranchiata contains only one genus, the nautilus. After this
palace, and I truly marvel to think it can go with you into the
“My supposition is that sheer chance has made us privy to an important
small duck, the tops of their bodies black and white—in short, a whole
as incredible as this sounds, it seemed, I swear, to be made of
and I can still see well enough to put it to use.* The first one of
“Yes, professor, but I was luckier than you, and right away I was able
“We use the Rouquayrol-Denayrouze device, invented by two of your
specimen.”
“Oh! Elsewhere!” Conseil put in, shaking his head.
danger of being permanently attached to these reefs, and that would
islanders—but no longer fearing them because the captain’s unflappable
Meanwhile the grave digging went slowly. Fish fled here and there as
have scared off a shark. And what powerful inhalations! The Canadian
whose significance could not escape me—all this, taken together, had a
21. A Mass Execution
most valuable, they’re priced individually. The other pearls that
meant to be a refuge for people like its commander, people who have
me to take a single step.
prisoner has, the freedom to pace his cell! That’s not enough for us.”
the genus Globicephalus exclusive to the Mediterranean, the forepart
“Not at all, my boy. That was a stroke of genius, catching one of
“So long as it navigates horizontally,” Ned Land muttered, “I’ve no
might have had deplorable consequences. But his anger was diverted by
in order to float off his sloops of war. The Zealous and the new
hour. Near the afternoon it was already cruising under the immense
lobes. I also saw myriads of those northernmost sea butterflies three
lives were dashed in this shipwreck! How many victims were swept under
cymopolia crabs, woolly-handed crabs, etc. Among the Macrura (which
memoirs, took up all my time and left me without a moment of weariness
oars and hit the dark troughs of the waves, pitter-pattering like
were followed by a bed of that viscous slime Americans call “ooze,”
lounge. It was deserted. I consulted the various instruments. The
the explosions grew more intensely audible. Shells furrowed the water
Commander Farragut, like Christopher Columbus before him, asked for a
upper strata.
“Without my noticing it?”
board. Since that night when the skiff had left the Nautilus on some
horizon. They form a whirlpool aptly called “the ocean’s navel,” whose
But one distressing circumstance totally thwarted the Canadian’s
crusts, and whose odd grunting has earned them the nickname “sea
the lowest depths of an underwater valley gouged between this cape and
would be necessary to expel the excess water, and our pumps might not
22,000,000. Off the coast of Norway, the total is the same.”
from Conseil. I informed him that they were made from the smooth,
“Then here’s how to calculate it,” I replied. “In one hour each man
The moon then passed its zenith. Jupiter was rising in the east. In
breeze itself, that poured into us this luxurious intoxication!
blazing core of light, whose glow grew stronger and dazzled the eyes.
were put there by the chief officer, and they enabled me to determine
up of individuals from different nationalities? This was just one more
it with open mouth. These were either flying gurnards or kitelike sea
physiognomists, those analysts of facial character.
merges with other polyparies, forming compact, hopelessly tangled
This new Search, after putting in at several stops over the Pacific,
This bay, repeatedly dredged, furnished a huge supply of excellent
Nemo when the latter silenced me:
panopyra, and finally some wonderful Oculina flabelliforma,
degrees 50’ and 77 degrees 15’ west. Its coastline looked flat, but
“Indeed,” I said, “this sea is mentioned as one of the worst, and in
seas. I’ll be glad to have done it, but in order to have done it, it
unimportant. What I can now assert is that I’ve earned the right to
amount found in the Nautilus.”
they were paralyzing my movements. I was sinking! I was suffocating
appeased, we felt an urgent need for sleep. A natural reaction after
neither follow nor count its revolutions.
Gifted with uncommon manual ability, Ned Land was a Canadian who had
through gills, and designed to live in water.” They consist of two
Such words from the lips of this emotionless Flemish boy showed that
that it sounds incredible! I’m the chronicler of deeds seemingly
doubt attracted by the brilliant glow of our electric beacon.
whole, affecting the Scotia’s hull in that quarter a little astern of
“Excellent, sir.”
Abraham Lincoln’s speed increased. Its masts trembled down to their
The skiff couldn’t avoid the collision. Half overturned, it shipped a
its quietus amid a universal burst of laughter. Wit had defeated
Asia combined, taking in an area that lay between latitude 12 degrees
At Random!
I gaped at the captain.
piece.
unrolling upstage in a theater. In this strange setting Captain Nemo
our ammunition in vain.
23. “Aegri Somnia”
had arisen, too many images were keeping my eyelids open! Where were
Atlantic!
expel water from the ballast tanks; on the pressure gauge, a needle
the Nautilus.
“Let me get within four harpoon lengths of it,” the Canadian shot
when our so-called narwhale lay in sight of the Abraham Lincoln.”
to narrate them with the most scrupulous accuracy; and one odd detail:
“And you attribute this color to the presence of microscopic algae?”
coast of Papua. On this occasion Captain Nemo told me that he intended
Leyden jars charged with high-voltage electricity. They go off at the
“If they’re agreeable.”
long; then little one-meter sharks, the head large, the snout short
stateroom, dare him face to face, brave it out with word and deed!
the Israelites did cross there in returning to the Promised Land, and
cautiously, while slowly emptying its ballast tanks.
publisher Pierre Hetzel pronounced the book unprintable. Verne
could stay afloat for hours, perhaps even until daybreak.
narrow passageway, liners going from Suez to Bombay, Calcutta,
on the flesh it lies loose. But its nucleus is always some small, hard
“A triggerfish,” I said.
13. The Ice Bank
quiverings of their four leaflike arms, letting the opulent tresses of
to gather momentum, the monster abruptly dashed toward the Abraham
are such zealots.
harpoon. If I can be helpful to the captain, he can use me any way he
“In my own name, sir!”
to put on my heavy aquatic clothes, helped by the longboat’s
captain: how can you light your way at the bottom of the ocean?”
lurking in these dark reaches, and my diving suit might not be
group. Then his ships arrived at the unknown reefs of
suits of armor that were both yielding and resistant, you might
these weeds, which, much to their crews’ dismay, slowed them down to a
water wouldn’t be quite so high because here we’re dealing with salt
bent to any use and which reigns supreme aboard my vessel. It does
years later, the company’s assets were increased by four
“Apes maybe?” Ned Land exclaimed.
tissue of these sponges, and from this tissue there escaped a steady
northwest, and the next day our frigate’s propeller finally churned
kingdom blossoms, and the vegetable kingdom doesn’t!”
that steward will be plenty welcome whether he brings the one or the
Units of Measure
see any fish!”
crustaceans, these fish are protected by armor plate that’s neither
The longboat flew over the waves. A few minutes later we encountered
supposedly lost with all hands, in the absence of any news, amounts to
full. Now then, the tides aren’t strong in the Pacific, and if you
galleons at the port of Vigo would have been a violation of their
“You’ve never fished these seas, Ned?”
electric glow that had played around this underwater boat like some
Just then Conseil and the Canadian entered with a calm, even gleeful
They looked in vain. The Hope and the Search passed right by Vanikoro
peering eagerly into the profound gloom.
saturating the air. Oh, if only we had the chemical methods that would
splitting them with dreadful cracklings. It was an old-fashioned
on its side, its belly riddled with bites, the poor cetacean was
from us—sleep was needed as well!
cell positioned between two quartz-rich shells, plus long purple and
dreadful disaster, or do the waves still keep this casualty a secret?
in dry dock. They couldn’t believe their eyes. Two and a half meters
Captain Nemo stopped on these last words, perhaps sorry that he had
But Captain Nemo kept climbing. I didn’t want to fall behind. I
“Just one. If a sea exists at the South Pole, it’s possible this sea
one only in a portfolio of Japanese drawings.
like to hear the views of one chronicler in the 14th century?”
matter that makes up the bodies of our big marine mammals.
never does.”
FATHOM 6 feet
and we drank their milk and ate their meat with a pleasure that was a
parakeets of every color, with solemn cockatoos that seemed to be
“Why?” I answered.
resented the offhand manner in which the captain had extended his
shortage of sharks to assist them with their undertaking chores.
important. They absorb the marine salts, they assimilate the solid
at master’s expense. And must it be said . . . ?”
“True, sir, very true,” I replied with growing excitement.
utmost rigidity. In fact, thanks to this cellular arrangement, it has
ship could descend below this tract of ice.
Nemo pointed to a reddish spot in the distance, a sort of wide glow
“Rise to the surface and slaughter the vermin.”
the loss of their insane hopes. But ultimately I feel less sorry for
half-rotted barrels and disemboweled trunks in the midst of the dingy
great current’s waters take at least three years to circle it.
proposition. Conseil was eager to accept, and this time the Canadian
stranded to leeward, held up for some days. The natives gave the
networks that unreeled as high as ten fathoms above it; the latter
miles with the wind behind us is no big deal. By tomorrow, who knows
Yet if some saw it purely as a scientific problem to be solved, more
citizens, if we’re to believe Athenaeus, a Greek physician predating
Conseil appeared.
in my stateroom, we stared at each other without pronouncing a
benefited from a fair distribution of this wealth, whereas now it will
Squalus.
Pacific Steam Navigation Co. Consequently, this extraordinary cetacean
oven was replaced by the tranquil waters of a lake?”
“A second Nautilus?” Conseil said.
a net he carried at his side.
convalescing in the grip of some misanthropic fit, was he instead far
Our return journey began. Captain Nemo resumed the lead in our little
smoke escaping from the mountain’s crater gives it the appearance of a
I might add that during the night, the Gulf Stream’s phosphorescent
moorings holding the Abraham Lincoln to its Brooklyn pier. And so if
eels quivering like fireworks serpents, armies of crab that fled
From inside the boat, there suddenly came noises of iron fastenings
case.
MOBILIS IN MOBILI
Now then, at the spot indicated on the world map, one of these
crew ever emerging from their usual inertia. They were no more
and Humboldt, who entered its disappearance in the ledger of myths and
But there was no question now. We were stretched out on the back of
Nautilus was skimming at moderate speed.
reef, emerged from the waves two miles offshore.
batfish, a sort of reddish isosceles triangle half a meter long, whose
agreements hadn’t suddenly come up.
CHAPTER 19
known by the name melon jellyfish and are bathed in the shimmer of the
attached to the seafloor by only the most makeshift methods. They had
electricity work with such power? Where did this nearly unlimited
“Yes, forgotten by the world but not by us! We dig the graves, then
over the world.”
grease. They didn’t even have instruments for taking their bearings,
“I don’t say nay.”
turned into mermaids, half woman, half fish.
horror, unable to move.
The next day, February 10, several ships appeared, running on our
I gaped at the bizarre individual who had just spoken these words. Was
Around the Nautilus the sea was boiling furiously. A stream of waves,
fury burst from every throat!
surface. A few morning gleams infiltrated the liquid strata. Beneath
the very place these islets have more recently formed. Then Thera sank
many different names. It was located between latitude 5 degrees 55’
scattered spots.
of the horizon from southwest to northwest. Going up Ceylon’s west
they won’t eat me without my kicking up a protest!”
succulent aroma that perfumed the air.
$500.00 to the man who can pierce that infernal beast!”
believe in the existence of a mammal with a powerful constitution,
far from convinced.
eager fisherman arrives early, well, we can watch him at work.”
mica-rich dust on this beach flew into the air like a cloud of sparks.
thrust, that must be assessed at one atmosphere per every thirty feet
coral, gorgonian coral arranged into fan shapes, soft sponges from
table with very dainty flesh. We also caught a large number of
Astrolabe wellnigh perished, but my Nautilus is in no
author of The Toilers of the Sea.
“Without getting your feet wet.”
The captain offered me a cup of this still-warm milk. I couldn’t help
ashore by the skiff. The soil’s nature was still the same:
soundings were taken in the south Atlantic near the 35th parallel, and
Taking advantage of this situation, my two companions and I found
falling from four frosted half globes set in the scrollwork of the
“The common narwhale, or sea unicorn, often reaches a length of sixty
came to a physical contest, we would be facing an overwhelming
break out on their eyes, sores form on their bodies, and some are even
I beg you to control your impatience. We need to act shrewdly, and
Ned just let me talk without saying much himself, I pressed him more
would automatically attract some inhabitants of these dark strata. But
animal, in your own personal interest.”
master’s objection? I refuse to believe that an American is at the end
I went below to the cabin occupied by Ned Land and Conseil, and I
these bandits who lays a hand on me—”
steel spindle, obediently in motion, without rigging or masting, and
“Actually he’s right,” I said. “I’ve heard about that picture. But the
could touch without being blasted; my wonderment was boundless, and it
nearly went blind from a worn-out retina, while Conseil, as stoic as
Indeed, the table had been laid. Apparently Captain Nemo had given
Indeed, despite its efforts, despite the powerful methods it used to
seen to that day. We also gathered in a few sea cucumbers, some pearl
warding it off. Our sole chance for salvation is to work faster than
nightfall. In any event, it’s better to perish with it than be
was abruptly nailed to the spot by these words pronounced in French:
The Bay of Vigo
wild profusion; and beneath the shade of their green canopies, at the
What changes had come over him? From what cause? I had no reason to
say. These clothes consisted of jacket and pants. The pants ended in
the bird they’re named after, redheaded groupers whose dorsal fins are
“Because, professor, this beast is made of boilerplate steel!”
of fifty meters. Here are some large-scale charts on which you’ll be
casting a few pale rays over this submerged continent. It was only a
narwhale.”
I HAVE NO IDEA how long this slumber lasted; but it must have been a
from the island of Ceylon to Sydney, also calling at King George Sound
That day, January 21, 1868, the chief officer went at noon to take the
muscles, but hadn’t a nerve in him, not a sign of nerves—the mental
how this news was received by the Canadian. In any case, there was no
huge curls were lifting little by little. The horizon grew wider and
polar air again?
Cape Satisfaction!”
“If master will examine it closely, he’ll see that I deserve no great
the wheel, and the Abraham Lincoln would chart a course toward
Public opinion being pronounced, the States of the Union were the
looked on leaving its place of manufacture. The long snake was covered
some eight miles to the west. Right off, I observed a cluster of
at the approaches to their campsite.
count had built a smaller craft, only to go off and miscarry a second
“What’s that, sir?”
only be 6.57 metric tons.”
prairie, a tightly woven carpet of algae, gulfweed, and bladder wrack
currents that can be identified by their temperature and color, the
sea?”
by Scott’s in Glasgow. Its tanks were manufactured by Cail & Co. in
this space, wouldn’t that raise its temperature and delay its
“And how do you know all this?” I exclaimed.
little the side walls were closing in on each other. The liquid strata
again! If we can stay attached to the Nautilus, we can still make it
determined to do his duty to the end.
fish. Nothing could have made a more unusual sight than the marvelous
over their palm fronds.
Laurencia primafetida. Our beverage consisted of clear water to which,
myself, I’ll fight to the death.”
meters—about three and a quarter vertical leagues—and the ocean floor
grew weaker. I felt a mortal chill freeze my dull, nearly paralyzed
shells. They’re right-handed with only rare exceptions, and when by
same waterways where Captain Denham, aboard the Herald, payed out
know how they felt about being shoved inside this aquatic prison, but
and the Davis Strait.”
“It can’t be!” I exclaimed.
Bell aboard the Minerva. So I was able to study the madreporic process
by side.
considerable resistance. In 1864, during experiments on fishing by
raise the tide and tear the Nautilus from its coral bed. Near
need a harbor.”
good deal of rubble from the shipwreck could still be found, but winds
“In that case, sir, I’m forced to believe that you’ve kept up
conditions I admit that we could easily have gotten away. In fact, the
hunting in a forest, I was content to reply:
secretive as ours wouldn’t risk a canal intersected with locks. So the
invited me to take a seat next to him. He questioned me with interest
“Fine, captain, but now we come to a genuine difficulty. You’re able
sky was overcast. A squall was on the way.
that carries the ocean’s waters into the Mediterranean basin; then a
while taking on a tree form, as some naturalists have very aptly
presence. A powerful spyglass to his eye, he scrutinized every point
the coast of Syria, I recaptured a few specimens of my fish, adorned
engineer, had set up his locomotive equipment.
escaping from it. This boat is a masterpiece of modern technology, and
cooling of basaltic rocks likewise call for a much longer period of
going?”
encrusted with limestone deposits and arranged with a symmetry that
“And I’ll be able to visit those famous islands where the Compass and
The paintings of Illinois watercolorist Milo Winter (1888-1956) first
comes to whales, you can believe anything! (Look at that one move!
or crabs weighing 200 metric tons! Why not? Formerly, in prehistoric
pay.”
is used for various tasks depending on its degree of elasticity,
shipped out in cases weighing 125 to 150 kilograms. Then they remove
The next day, March 21, bright and early at five o’clock in the
“Completely.”
Next day, November 10: the same neglect, the same solitude. I didn’t
“Yes,” Captain Nemo said, heading to the lounge door.
populated. The cowls over the companionways would vomit a torrent of
“We’re boxed in?”
surface of the water when the collision occurred. However, I could see
worms. But having gone past the shallows of the Strait of Sicily, the
some twenty kilograms; with its tail cut off, it would have formed a
trunk; these are the giants of the species, with a circumference of
whale, mine was just a baby.”
the ocean’s wonders? Absolutely not! So I couldn’t entertain this idea
some magnificent rocks carpeted by the finest zoophyte specimens, and
airship, and after clearing the obstacle, it would resume its speedy
“But,” Conseil asked, “haven’t certain famous pearls been quoted at
Storms! All by itself it creates these fearsome cyclones through the
“Aren’t you coming, captain?” I asked.
it’s beyond me to describe. Nobody ate, nobody slept. Twenty times a
to ten atmospheres, to 100 atmospheres at 3,200 feet, and to 1,000
In 1785 the Count de La Pérouse and his subordinate, Captain de
Soon I had put on my clothes, which were woven from strands of
caves, unfathomable holes at whose far ends I could hear fearsome
“In business, Ned, but not in mathematics. Listen to me. Let’s accept
The Nautilus has gone aground, and judging from the way it’s listing,
ceases, their influence fades, their power vanishes! Ah, sir, live!
navigating. Leaving Old Bahama Channel, which is fourteen leagues wide
“Master is well aware,” Conseil replied, “that I’m not seasoned in
beings and oppressed races living on this earth, poor people to
Meanwhile, fearing that Dumont d’Urville wasn’t abreast of Dillon’s
carriers and moving their claws with a scrap-iron clanking, titanic
wouldn’t receive an absolute check. Nevertheless, contrary to my
us?”
had cleared the four vertical leagues separating it from the surface
stones their slings hurl with such dexterity.
Finally this long night was over. My imperfect memories won’t let me
thirty-five miles per hour. The propeller was going so fast I could
than as a professor of natural history.
summits.
sea? Another day? I would be dead first!
this phenomenon, but such serious, practical countries as England,
no boilers for steam to burst open; no fires to fear, because this
to miss this reptile, because from Conseil’s description, I believe I
someday in the depths of the seas, together with its curator. I wanted
ready to return to my stateroom, when Captain Nemo turned to me and
the braying of an ass. The Totipalmes (fully webbed) family was
the oyster’s meaty tissue, boil it, and finally strain it, in order to
evening’s dinner wouldn’t make any sense.”
sharp triangular teeth and so transparent it was almost invisible amid
was nowhere in sight.
Finally the ship’s rays appeared. Their luminous trail guided us to
“Because nobody can clear the Ice Bank. Your captain’s a powerful man,
I crept forward through the Nautilus’s dark gangways, pausing after
“Only one penny to those poor people who make their employers rich!
sketches of fish, seashells, coral, sometimes in great catalogs that
living man, swimming vigorously, sometimes disappearing to breathe at
coral grave is a tranquil grave, and may Heaven grant that my
with red spots, and crowned by a wondrous blossoming of tentacles. As
gave way, and ripped out of its socket, the skiff was hurled like a
propeller was brought to its maximum speed, and its four blades
group of Samoa, scene of the slaying of Captain de Langle, friend of
enormous wreckage, and again because of this speed of movement.
underwater boat seemed to be a blood relation of theirs: living,
so-called clouds were caused simply by the changing densities of the
down the spine.
seemed to be in the grip of an excitement he tried in vain to
in these waterways, if, tomorrow, it still floated off to the open sea
that many who face those fearsome animals don’t come back
The hotel elevator dropped us off in the main vestibule on the
speed. Driven by energetic arms, the longboat flew on its
makes delicious eating, plus loin of imperial angelfish, whose flavor
sometimes leaning against the sternrail, I eagerly scoured that
covered with a shell), which consists of two families, the
Roque on the coast of Brazil, and forks into two branches, one going
3,000 meters between Rhodes and Alexandria, and passing well out from
rotation, and descend to a depth of twelve meters with the help of a
“Then, Professor Aronnax, I propose an unusual excursion.”
sacred to the goddess Venus, their eyes set in brows of gold; a
instincts, we followed Ned Land, whose long legs threatened to outpace
completely toasted. On the inside there appeared some white pasta, a
southernmost regions. After spending five minutes in this trance, he
the most powerful animals. Ned Land was content to sharpen his
You sensed that it was alive!
seals and aquatic bears had paid the price. Evenly heated by all its
I observed him with great care. His movements were systematically
“A mere nothing, sir.”
Sailors’ luck led the Nautilus straight to Reao Island, one of the
would straighten up once the block came to a halt. But before that
Almost every day the panels in the lounge were open for some hours,
Canadian, miraculously saved, stood and plunged his harpoon all the
coral,” prickly fungus coral in the shape of mushrooms, sea anemone
“A left-handed shell!” Conseil repeated, his heart pounding.
10,000 sesterces apiece, and which they killed at the table, so they
gliding like a ghost. His chest was heaving, swelling with sobs. And I
still time—”
shrewdest navigators, that d’Urville! He was the Frenchman’s Captain
France and all corroded by salt water. He opened it and I saw a bundle
crescents and with necklaces made from beads of red and white
bone. This order contains four families. Examples: flatfish such as
not even this sublime experience was worth the loss of my
“These are the normal navigational instruments,” I replied, “and I’m
appearance. An iron bedstead, a worktable, some washstand
As for my account of this excursion under the waters, I’m well aware
“But how will we set out?”
be sold for its weight. So I think it’s time we gave Captain Nemo the
vestments.”
“Then let’s look for fruit and vegetables.”
didn’t surprise me, because I knew these animals were being hunted so
sharp rocks on the seafloor, where the hardest objects are smashed,
battering ram propelled with infinite power. Hurled aloft, ice rubble
and the Gulf of California; but it’s off Ceylon that such fishing
to accompany a two-hour stroll in such unfamiliar trappings—it was
experiments on the different temperatures in various strata of the
“That’s the nuisance in not knowing every language,” Conseil replied,
any place. You’re safe on this lake, and nobody else can visit its
secret of human destiny? Was it here that this strange man came to
his chief officer, the same applied. Not one crewman was visible for a
An instant later, the longboat’s sailors helped us overboard one after
medusas whose milky white or dainty pink parasols were festooned with
depression.
has gradually made smaller. With its untold depths, couldn’t the sea
other, not glancing at me, perhaps not even seeing me. His step was
batch of cobblestones over the surface of the water. There high
Nemo replied. “But in the Torres Strait, one still finds a
filled with the rarest marine herbs, which, although they were pressed
iron ladder. Forcibly seized, Ned Land and Conseil were behind me. At
Mediterranean completely.”
Mexico, it heads north up the American coast, advances as far as
I could hardly wait until our position was reported on the chart. Near
heaped on it by the popular press, and the human imagination soon got
At an elevation of about thirty meters, the nature of the terrain
LITER Roughly 1 quart
winds of its monsoons. Their captains and passengers no longer prepare
had fared 17,000 leagues, and as Ned Land put it, there was no end in
this boat had always been mistaken for a marine animal.
Company.
in contact with flowers, rocks, buds, seashells, and polyps, the edges
“So I had difficulty deciding,” he said. “But I concluded that my
“Then we have ample time to finish our voyage,” Conseil replied, “if
“and right in the channel that separates the volcanic islets of Nea
the rarest birds of paradise. It measured three decimeters long. Its
Meanwhile preparations for this daring attempt were getting under
“The civilized world!” he said, shaking his head. “Don’t worry,
I stared at Ned Land, whose motives were easy to guess.
only a certain number of men, so couldn’t master estimate their
a billion! Now then, this liquid mass nearly equals the total amount
“Is it indiscreet to ask how you discovered this tunnel?”
Conseil replied serenely.
case, all we could do was fire at them on the wing, which left us
110th meridian. These bearings determined, the frigate took a more
of a scientific problem to be solved, but a quite real and serious
Captain Nemo took every desired precaution in crossing it. Floating
movement and love; it’s living infinity, as one of your poets put
interrupted my reading.
impossible to defend. So it was essential to hurry and empty the
two miles out.
them. The Nautilus was imprisoned in a genuine tunnel of ice about
standard definition of ‘trapped,’ at least in the civilized world.”
hands were no help to me; my mouth opened convulsively, filling with
hunting right in the midst of this element that has long seemed so far
locality a number of sea turtles were sleeping on the surface of the
we had observed earlier. There were rays of gigantic size, five meters
Poe, who were master divers, and I didn’t lose my head on the way
every country in the world. The door closed again.
harpoon, a dreadful weapon in his hands.
milky. Slender sheaves of cirrus clouds were followed on the horizon
plus myriads of charming fish including greenfish, damselfish,
Our frigate drew nearer to the cetacean. I examined it with a
Finally, at around four o’clock, this marvelous excursion came to an
details on the laying of this cable.
37 degrees centigrade = human body temperature
continent will stretch from New Zealand and New Caledonia as far as
strata. Intense nightmares besieged me. In these mysterious marine
I was left to myself; I went to bed but slept pretty poorly. I kept
suddenly I was refreshed by a current of clean air, scented with a
plants, hosts of crustaceans swarming among them. I plunged on,
furiously with other monsters crawling up the Nautilus’s sides. The
nearly 10,000 leagues in three and a half months, a track longer than
trial. After that, these villainous attempts were not repeated.
on us. But it was inconceivable to me that it had discovered the
after long disputes, naturalists have finally placed in the vegetable
faithfully obeyed the hands of its helmsman.
LEAGUE In Verne’s context, 2.16 miles
the Red Sea and the Mediterranean near the Greek Islands or the coast
“Bah!” he replied. “Nothing’s out there, Professor Aronnax, and if
These various exhibits from the sea were immediately lowered down the
voracious melanoptera appeared around our longboat; but, paying no
and if our submersible remained even slightly stationary, it would be
purple, my lips blue, my faculties in abeyance. I could no longer see
others the red-tailed tropic bird, the size of a pigeon, its white
THE NEXT DAY I woke up with my head unusually clear. Much to my
varieties of fish, it’s because they were attracted by our electric
rested on the icy bottom at a depth of 350 meters, the depth at which
this was his favorite book as a teenager, and Cousteau himself, most
the lounge windows. Captain Nemo made his way to the helmsman’s side
himself a separate world that saves its most astonishing wonders just
Near evening Reao Island melted into the distance, and the Nautilus
steering this submersible, and if it made a dive, we were done for!
Santorini. Would fate bring me into his presence before our departure?
address him.
the Nautilus. By one o’clock we had returned.
read, I was waking up as my dream neared its climax! How painfully the
unicorn of colossal dimensions, no longer armed with a mere lance but
under the seas? Are you bored with the constantly changing sight of
The Canadian left without giving me time to answer him.
“Either we know every variety of creature populating our planet, or we
manuscript, and if you give us back our freedom—”
and Conseil stood up to leave.
frosted half globe curving out of the cabin’s ceiling.
supply the Nautilus with such wonderful dye, spiky periwinkles fifteen
state of affairs for floating the Nautilus off. However, the ship
“About 17,000.”
thought of sleeping. Unable to compete with the monster’s speed, the
Some moments later, we saw a dozen crewmen set foot on the shelf of
sufficient to light our way. Besides, it’s unwise to carry electric
At 11:45 the sun, by then seen only by refraction, looked like a
might give me a clue to his nationality.
‘rams,’ whose mass and motor power it would possess simultaneously.
I took a last look at the battleship, which was putting on steam. Then
“Conseil!” I shouted. “Conseil!”
one dorsal fin; these animals are covered with small scales, or have
put you back on the platform of this ship that has served as your
beautiful works created by the hand of man. I sought them greedily,
Seated on the afterdeck, Ned Land and I chatted about one thing and
colors disappeared little by little, with emerald and sapphire shades
commander has invited us, together with master, for a visit tomorrow
degrees of longitude. It’s the most tranquil of the seas; its currents
gives such rays the appearance of a luminous fog; but above water as
“Look at its spiral!”
ten-to-one ratio of your high-speed steamers; but its lines are
were already there.
five miles off the eastern shores of Australia.
forest clinging to the sides of a peak in the Harz Mountains, but a
blue and exclusive to these Antarctic seas, the former “so oily,” I
couldn’t sit still, and wanted to breathe the fresh night air.
I turned and discovered the captain.
check. Not only are the side walls closing in, but there aren’t ten
“I understand, captain. Nevertheless, allow me to inform you that by
been under very long. But that stroke from the shark’s tail could have
heard indistinct sounds, a sort of elusive harmony produced by distant
“It must be said, Conseil.”
gently ironic tone.
conversation, lively at the outset, then languished. A definite
off a phosphorescent glow, infinitely bigger and faster than any
only claimed these devilfish could drag ships under, but a certain
sea when he thwarted all attacks on the surface? What ship could
to you.”
animal’s existence to be disputed aboard his vessel. He believed in it
before we stuff the skiff with them, it would be wise to find out
grassy tufts from the genus Zoantharia; and to complete the illusion,
recommend that they be acclimatized to fresh water, a change,
human contact, I had found a fellow countryman! Was he the only
“Correct, but under such conditions the man has no freedom. He’s
Persian Gulf.
we were alone on the platform. No crewmen. Not even Captain
order from the indecisive King Philip V: without unloading, the convoy
At six o’clock day began to break, and with the dawn’s early light,
would stay in custody at the offshore mooring of Vigo until the enemy
we were beyond all sight of shore by January 14. The Nautilus slowed
up most of the oxygen it contained. In essence, over an hour’s time a
up.”
on. And as for their speech, it’s utterly incomprehensible.”
vast broken plains, a tangle of confused chunks with all the
America, how could this animal be killed in the east, unless it had
The man’s name! His life story written by himself! So the secret of
three hours had passed, the thermometer gave the exterior temperature
*Latin: a spigot “just for that purpose.” Ed.
put one over on me!”
violent cannonade, Captain Nemo hadn’t appeared on the platform. And
“I saw . . . ,” he muttered, “I saw . . . but we mustn’t talk
stick yourself inside these clothes?”
its prey, went ahead or astern, obeyed its rudder, dived when the
underwater, the temperature didn’t go over 10 degrees to 12 degrees
“To speak with you, captain.”
Professor Orbigny has classified as native to the Pacific Ocean.
and we’ll never regret having known him.”
Meanwhile, continuously swept along by the Nautilus, where we lived in
of squid that, according to Professor Orbigny, are unique to the Red
millimeter. Some of these tiny creatures stick together over an area
“Ned Land married to Cleopatra?” Conseil exclaimed.
centers; in other words, they’ve thirty times the thickness.”
appropriately gradual diagonal with the help of his side fins, which
by intense flashes of light. In essence, this mountain was a
“The hotel will keep them for us.”
neither Professor Dumeril nor Professor de Quatrefages, would have
Schools of elegant, playful dolphin swam alongside for entire
“That I’ve seen,” the Canadian said.
“Yet,” Conseil asked me, “doesn’t master believe in gigantic
At this order, which was relayed to the engine by means of a
pleaded, but to no avail. The sheet-iron walls were deaf. I didn’t
trembling hands. His bewildered eyes indicated that he didn’t know to
did these articulates belong, these creatures for which the rocks
continuity not even possessed by sunlight. Now, look at that clock:
waters seemed to be dyed red, as Captain Nemo had already
could see nothing else.
“But what is it that startles you?”
hour, sometimes on the surface of the sea, sometimes thirty feet
greenish bands that radiated down from the top. These were the young
because according to the Bible itself, the sun doesn’t date from the
“You’re an engineer, then, Captain Nemo?”
in sight of the Hawaiian Islands, where the famous Captain Cook met
like genuine seafaring woodcocks and were sometimes a meter long,
“But every slave has the right to recover his freedom! By any
“Or in other words, on our gigantic narwhale.”
leaning toward a reddish brown; their coats were short and less than
dive and go back up in quick succession. A stone cut in the shape of a
“Admitted,” the Canadian replied, “but we’ve got to risk it. Freedom
CHAPTER 22
. . . ?”
these wonders. So keep calm, and let’s see what’s happening around
galleons before the allied fleets arrived, and there would have been
“Order Passeriforma, division Clystomora,” Conseil replied.
Vigo, Atlantis, the Ice Bank, the South Pole, our imprisonment in the
“In the name of which sovereign, captain?”
men go out and dig this carbon fuel for which I don’t need a single
expressions. “You expect us to fall for that?”
hanging.
moderns aren’t much farther along than the ancients. It took many
course was south-southwest. We were turning our backs on Europe.
somersaults, it turns completely upside down. That’s what happened
forty miles per hour. It was writhing in the waters.
me, “I’ve done in the ocean’s interior, but more easily, more
of the sea. Then the level of the oysterbank would lower
would cast six months of shadow over these circumpolar regions.
us.”
surface of the ocean. This is our home port, secure, convenient,
around?”
its keel, since the average depth of these seas is 1,800 meters; but
horizon. Captain Nemo was already up, and I had started to stretch my
stop studying the pressure gauge. Since the toppling of this iceberg,
in other words, slightly more than 500 leagues. The Nautilus adopted
“Professor Aronnax,” replied Captain Nemo, whose fingers took their
a triumphant shout, and came back to me, carrying a magnificent bird
twenty days and brought up 76,000,000 oysters.”
couldn’t make up my mind about certain otherwise excellent dishes, and
these holes to breathe. Once the birds have migrated northward to
pranksters of the seas, and sailfish three meters long, those shrewd
“Humph!” the Canadian put in.
petrels including several with arching wings, enthusiastic eaters of
He didn’t hear me.
So Captain Dumont d’Urville had put to sea in command of a vessel
land!”
placed in my hand, and a few minutes later, after the usual
trigger-operated valve could release into the metal chamber. In a
“No, professor, but it needs electricity to run, batteries to generate
Roque. But then the Nautilus veered away again and went looking for
profound impact on my mind. My eyes never left the captain. Hands
arteries, it has spasms, and I side with the scholarly Commander
up. Strange rumblings were audible along our sides. It was the water
“The thought of how hideously fast the Nautilus will need to go, if
efficiency, this underwater boat had to have a sizeable crew, so if it
finally Captain Dumont d’Urville in 1827, untangled the whole chaotic
and the Terror, the Englishman Sir James Clark Ross found Victoria
certain sum of $2,000.00 was waiting for the man who first sighted the
ship’s rigging would have been unusable, because all its tackle would
a marvelous boat!”
Commander Farragut was determined to take full advantage of it.
“At least,” I asked, “the fishermen are well paid, aren’t they?”
This is the substance of the account I gave Captain Nemo.
on. “Here’s an island. On this island there are trees. Under those
that gulf formed by the mainland and Mannar Island. Under these dark
was increased a hundredfold by biconvex lenses that were designed like
allied navies were roving the Atlantic.
surface of the ocean.
in these waterways as they tried to get directions from the hazy
Bunsen cells, but they’re big and strong, and experience has proven
would be a year that lets us see everything—”
Conseil was in ecstasy. Carried away by his violent instincts, Ned
not without praying, like a good Hindu, for the favors of the radiant
lord-knows-what schemes of dreadful revenge.
advantage of it!”
wheel. Steam rushed whistling into the gaping valves. Long horizontal
object, say a sterile egg or a grain of sand, around which the
“Farther south?” I asked, gaping at the captain.
two companions and I bowed reverently.
and master’s other fossil skeletons?”
all over again. Indeed, from this moment on, any maritime casualty
“Someone is sick?”
cities! Then again, who knows whether some tyrant . . .”
to turn on their assailants and capsize their longboats. But with
“The deepest parts of the ocean are totally unknown to us. No
was swearing like one possessed.
ravage another coconut palm. “Coconuts are admirable things, but
“Maybe,” I added, “it’s no more approachable than an electric eel or
ocean to replenish their oxygen supply. Hence the need for some
We were traveling due west and on January 11 we doubled Cape Wessel,
As for any hope of being rescued by Commander Farragut, that had to be
It was eight o’clock in the morning. We had four hours to ourselves
prisoner? Perfectly free. I opened my door, headed down the gangways,
“Fine, Professor Aronnax!” replied the Canadian, whose teeth seemed to
“Sir,” Ned Land told me that day, “if your captain goes any farther
during its six-month winter and became utterly inaccessible. What
escape the Nautilus’s spur! But this isn’t the place where you’ll
wheeled around under the ebb tide’s outbound thrust.
devilfish carcasses measuring two meters. Besides, according to the
accomplished in just twenty-four hours times two. Departing from the
sperm whales, they’re generally smaller than the bowhead whale.”
In two minutes we were on the strand. Loading provisions and weapons
ship? Are you sorry that fate has cast you into Captain Nemo’s hands?”
way into the devilfish’s triple heart.
get beyond it. Well now! In 1868, on this 21st day of March, I myself,
one more time.
“Just this, captain. In going toward the ocean’s lower strata, we know
After half an hour of walking, the seafloor grew rocky. Jellyfish,
thirty feet high, belonging to the palm species. As valuable as the
Meanwhile, briskly unconcerned, the Nautilus ran at full propeller
From Cape Horn to the Amazon
being good to eat?”
kingdom. Shrubs, and even a few trees, emerged from crevices in the
very rough exterior. Some of these shells were furrowed with flaky,
advance with definite alarm.
horizon once the Nautilus has risen to the surface of the waves.”
known as gulls or sea mews. Some were skillfully slain, and when
the hatches opened and closed as if automated. No more positions were
pearls were so big, they wouldn’t have gone through that strainer with
into the narrow lanes between the breakers. The skiff handled easily
matter had suffered deep abrasions. Blood clots had formed in this
Monroe. And the Canadian had such good luck that with a right-and-left
willing, it won’t perish with me. Signed with my name, complete with
isthmus, a sort of inaccessible Gibraltar whose fortifications the
while before its ice breakup; but in this case the proportions were
“I’m unable to answer you, Mr. Land. And trust me on this: for the
enough for us!”
paraded in a mat of banana leaves that had ragged edges and was
end up in well-traveled or deserted seas.”
its arches dislocated, its columns stretching over the earth; in these
air purification. They rubbed their eyes, stretched their arms, and
family. Examples: seahorses and dragonfish.”
As for the liquid surface of the sea, there was no longer any
lamps, they were unnecessary in the midst of these brilliant waters
- MYRIAMETER Roughly 6.2 miles
the day, and how could I not have been? I had read and reread every
this fact he drew the conclusion that the Antarctic Circle must
crimson fucus plants, buoyed by small air bladders and washed up on
whose elevation is 5,000 meters above sea level. Among other specimens
“According to Sirr’s book,” I replied, “these Ceylon fisheries are
Islands. Our bearings hadn’t been marked on the chart—perhaps
imagine.
myriads of birds enlivened this part of the polar continent. But they
“Go below!” he told me in a curt tone. “You and your companions, go
during a stay in Vanikoro six years earlier, he had seen two Europeans
glimmers; gray mullet thrashed the sea with their big fleshy tails;
sculpted. After our position fix, I reentered the lounge, and when our
vigor in their movements, thanks to their owning a triple heart!
“But when will it be over?”
rubble of little importance. The natives, adopting a system of denial
I’ll skip over the Canadian’s complaints. He had good grounds for an
got up several times. The Nautilus continued groping. Near three
among its brethren in that it practices monogamy, a good-sized
manuscript open on the table and told me in a more serious tone:
imagine Captain Nemo will let us go hunting on the coasts of Malabar
In fact, there beneath my eyes was a town in ruins, demolished,
action of underground fires, and they glistened under the stream of
sodium, and coalfields from which to dig its coal. Now then, right at
wake up under a mountain. But Ned Land had no idea in his head other
occupied by the helmsmen of steamboats on the Mississippi or Hudson
danger. Divided into seven compartments by watertight bulkheads, the
Hebrides, which the Portuguese seafarer Queirós discovered in 1606,
kilometers without the least bother.
thrashing of its tail, because that tail struck him across the chest
at a moderate speed.
wanted to weigh carefully what policy to pursue toward you. I had
angle to the perpendicular.
I got back on my feet. Like a torrent the sea was rushing into our
to the scourge that will strike our descendants once the seas are
and consequently more probable fashion, was he satisfied with merely
surface of the waves at a fairly oblique angle, decomposing by
pretty low rating.
the Abraham Lincoln has sustained. But most inconveniently for us, the
“Not a one, Mr. Naturalist. You will be going with us, right?”
What a struggle! Ned Land quickly grew enthusiastic and even ended up
speak, and for me to hear, that old Rabelaisian dialect still used in
render the jaw immovable, an order lacking true pelvic fins and which
“Yes, captain, although since I’ve been aboard your vessel, I should
Faroe and Lofoten Islands rush out with irresistible violence. They
marveling at the wild scenery of this region. There, leaning on
over a year collapsed all at once, and each man now wanted only to
and yellow, three-foot hake with a liver that makes a dainty morsel,
from our vigil the night before. I said no.
be rich in phosphorous, and I thought that they, too, must have been
The whole crew stayed on their feet all night long. No one even
volcanic phenomenon will bring these sunken ruins back to the surface
found a noticeable difference between the clean elastic fluid supplied
pelvises, close-cropped hair, and webbed feet. Resting on shore, they
proportions: a one-meter jack with a prominent head, several fine
throbbing with intense excitement. He scaled an overhanging rock that
poses. Here, its general effect suggested an oriental town with
Just then I heard indistinct chords from the organ, melancholy
frozen carapace of the Ice Bank.
“Master will allow me to make an incision,” he said.
museum. I ate supper, feasting with appetite on an excellent piece of
then told me. “Our poor Ned broods about all the things he can’t
returned at noon to the surface of the sea, it lay in sight of land
Thus reassured, Conseil went back to studying the shallows that the
“Can’t be,” the Canadian replied, “because this one’s complete while
with intense excitement, silently analyzing his strange facial
want to see for myself.”
pressure, it’s because the air penetrates the interior of your body
Mediterranean.”
longboat toward the floating barrel. We fished up the harpoon, and the
“192,000 years, my gallant Conseil, which significantly extends the
as -6 degrees centigrade. That was one degree gained. Two hours later
I had barely gotten up from my passably hard mattress when I felt my
their retreat was disturbed. I heard the pick ringing on the limestone
would give him his latitude. He waited for a few minutes until the orb
“Tomorrow at about this time, we’ll need to reopen the hatches to
After Ned was dressed, I reentered the lounge, whose windows had been
aren’t feasible for an ordinary ship are easy for the Nautilus. If a
“My dear sir, have you forgotten that the Nautilus is armed with a
market for these birds. So the natives have figured out how to create
“Right,” the captain replied, “this tobacco comes from neither Havana
of man intervened in that blaze? Had human beings fanned those flames?
made some discovery that has escaped me? Has the sea yielded up some
painter! If only I had been able to share with Conseil the intense
Whole weeks had often gone by without my encountering him. What was he
Captain Nemo had hundreds of them hunted because their black flesh is
straight stems, top-shell snails, blood-red tooth shells, and
wardrobe. Hanging from its walls, a dozen diving outfits were waiting
fused to each other.
pressure, which is abundantly supplied me by the Nautilus’s pumps.”
said.
shrewdly in the midst of this underwater spiderweb.
First, Ned Land closed and bolted the opening cut into the Nautilus’s
“I accept your calculations, captain,” I replied, “and I’d be
half paralyzed, and yelling:
passed by Tikopia Island, one of the New Hebrides. There a native
“No, Ned, I didn’t realize it, I don’t want to realize it, and I don’t
4. The Red Sea
obviously found what all mankind will surely find one day, the true
brown egg, furrowed with white bands, and lacking tails; globefish,
“An accident?” I said to him.
“And you can mine these veins of underwater coal?”
snout ending in a trunk that curved back toward the mouth. I sampled
couldn’t hold still on the planking of the deck below! And the Abraham
pearls to a mechanical operation. And could master tell us the profits
“We’ll soon see!” Ned Land shot back, shaking his head. “After all,
What was this astounding world that I didn’t yet know? In what order
Nautilus lay perfectly still. On its platform and on the embankment,
The crew sided with him unanimously. Indeed, were we likely to
We would soon settle this important point. The Nautilus traveled
“In the water.”
Nautilus. You’d think a total daze was reigning on board. Will you be
occurs, it might prove distressing to Mr. de Lesseps, who has gone to
right at our table, then stuffed ourselves. These mollusks belonged to
“You have more?”
stared at the lower strata of this southernmost ocean. The thermometer
his frightful program of revenge, or did he stop after that latest
15 degrees south. The weather was threatening, the sea rough and
had no trouble identifying them.
windward of the frigate, just as clear and intense as the night
“Oh, it’s you! What do you want?”
one of these animals there were found a buffalo head and a whole calf;
“Ned,” I asked him, “how can you still doubt the reality of this
quickly. I hurried to find out the Nautilus’s heading. The instruments
enough just to move, we have to see where we’re going! We must be able
condition where it could do me no harm; it won’t have any difficulty
Ocean Depths. Well received in scholarly circles, this book had
miss his past existence on land, for a Captain Nemo who was at home
whose gill openings are simply a large number of holes, an order
“You’ve no further doubts, commander, as to the nature of this
would find only pitiless enemies.
By January 2 we had fared 11,340 miles, hence 5,250 leagues, from our
“It’s just that I soon realized why my harpoon got blunted and
“Humph!” the harpooner put in, shaking his head with the attitude of a
holy-water font that could have held a whole lake, a basin more than
stempost, all objects hailing from the wrecked ships and now carpeted
location?”
artocarpus, these trees are justly ranked among the most useful
funnels.
I wanted to ask him. Unable to, I stopped him. I seized his arm. But
waves. It would have been difficult to capture these valuable
the ray and the shark.”
hisses and snorts unique to these frightened animals! Their tails
“His fancy,” the Canadian replied, “won’t take us very far. The
“Accordingly, professor, I don’t extract it with batteries; quite
whale kept coming closer. His eyes devoured it.
“He’s right.”
Queensland from the huge island of Papua, also called New Guinea.
evening the Nautilus took to the high seas once more.
beforehand, come inspect the cabin set aside for you. You need to
ended the domains of Captain Nemo. He had no desire to pass beyond
the days of the
Nautilus proceeded to midwater. Conseil, Ned, and I sat in front of
at random, discarded it immediately, consulted his instruments without
outburst. I didn’t answer him back, letting him blow off all the steam
shores of Ireland and Norway with lukewarm water, goes beyond
“42 degrees centigrade,” he said.
The Underwater Coalfields
“Exactly. And I’m certainly not far off when I estimate its value at
of a civilized man.”
few petrels, friends of the storms. The barometer fell significantly,
suspended like a chandelier, which our lamps flecked with fiery
hawksbill genus with arching backs whose scales are highly
“Yes. I want it settled once and for all. Speak just for me, strictly
“Which one, captain?”
when the Nautilus arrived. It maneuvered to cut into the herd of
encountered one of these monsters of colossal size in the seas of the
low latitude the sun sets quickly, without any twilight. I could see
midnight, seeing that all was quiet over the darkened waves as well as
wouldn’t have mistaken it for a gigantic cetacean? I spent
Egyptian plains opposite Arabia. This canal could be traveled in four
“Hmm!” I said to myself. “A cetacean as powerful as a whole cavalry
disheveled by the wind, long billows made the submersible roll very
must look for the multiple of 2,400 liters of air that gives us the
“I’m ready.”
of crustaceans of every type: lobsters, hermit crabs, prawns, mysid
salts left behind through evaporation, gets heavier, sinks again, and
But Captain Nemo came over and stopped me with a gesture. Then,
which nature has lavished yellow, azure, silver, and gold; yellow
existed between the two seas. I searched for it with my Nautilus, I
“Anyhow,” he said, “it’s not over yet! My first harpoon missed, that’s
narwhale. We’re going to rid the seas of it! The author of a
arrival of tempests; the compass, which steers my course; the sextant,
and lead, all caked with limestone concretions. A launch and whaleboat
answered you as early as our initial interview, but first I wanted to
up by gray mists in the middle of blizzards. Then explosions,
livable zone where most fish reside. Some of these animals can thrive
“Oh? And what, Mr. Land?”
soon as the animal is hit, no matter how lightly, it falls as if
covered with pamphlets, among which some newspapers, long out of date,
completely than he. Constantly tossed about by hurricanes, the Zealous
But in the 1860s France had to treat the Tsar as an ally, and Verne’s
“So, as I predicted, that man died during the night?”
buried, and it didn’t seem due for resurrection, when new facts were
Navy to Commander La Pérouse, with notes along the margin in the
an average speed of twenty-six miles per hour, the speed of an express
“Nothing.”
were in five meters of water, and the terrain had become almost flat.
electricity.”
granite foundation, like the weighty columns of Tuscan
question. So I was content to reply:
tons, and was shipped aboard the Great Eastern. This attempt also
“Yes, I love it! The sea is the be all and end all! It covers
he shook his head, pointed to the mountain’s topmost peak, and seemed
reincarnation of Sparta’s King Leonidas; Daniel O’Connell, Ireland’s
of krakens or other monsters of that ilk must be relegated to the
squadron at Brest under Rear Admiral Villaret de Joyeuse, who was
“A speed of fifty miles per hour.”
of Crespo Island, is an acceptable activity. But to roam the bottom of
carried from their shoulders a sort of net, which held those polished
through the port panel.
Ned Land couldn’t conceal his glee. He was a prisoner escaping from
the frigate skirted the flat, yellow coast of Long Island; and at
Captain Nemo still inhabits the ocean—his adopted country—may the hate
We went swiftly down the mountain. Once past the petrified forest, I
protest against our standard fare on the Nautilus.
out. Keeping to its northerly heading, it followed the long windings
shining coral and huge chunks of rock wrapped in splendid green furs
the world, going back to those seas where the Nautilus enjoyed the
surprise.
We were duty bound to fear so rather than hope so. But at 12:53 in the
Whether this individual was thirty-five or fifty years of age, I could
at the beauties of these new regions. The ice struck superb
“Speaking for myself, sir, I’ve encountered them everywhere.”
edible cuttlefish, and certain species of squid that the naturalists
desert, and when the tide caught him by surprise, he wellnigh perished
this dreadful engine of destruction on every sea!
disappointment.
underwater existence just as an air balloon rises above the breathable
“Very nearly, professor. For each foot of iceberg above the sea, there
their zenith. I then remembered that this loyal, good-natured
Canadian’s plans.
There once more, through the panels opening into these Caribbean
Ned bowed without answering him.
them over in my mind, submitted them to Conseil, but he was as baffled
the point I couldn’t grasp.
satellite would return to this same place the day after tomorrow, to
are settled on the isthmus after the Suez Canal has been cut through—a
oysters. As the Roman playwright Seneca recommended, we opened them
hadn’t suffered in any way, so solidly joined was its hull. But
two anal fins; black-tinted rudderfish that you catch by using
the waters, which Captain Nemo had resurrected before my eyes!
after our departure—the frigate lay abreast of Cabo Blanco, thirty
In short, dinner was excellent. Two ringdoves rounded out this
suborder Selacia, family Rajiiforma, genus electric ray.”
and its flank still carried the marked harpoon of a whaling ship from
the monster at close quarters, belaboring his enemy’s belly with stabs
exertions for much longer.
farseeing nature for that time when man will have exhausted his mines
and cemented during only the most frightful crises! Ah, my gallant
beckoned. Not once did he comment on the length or the hardships of a
Ned Land made his way to his post. The furnaces were urged into
place.”
“I’ve taken such observations,” he told me, “and I can vouch for their
HOW I GOT ONTO the platform I’m unable to say. Perhaps the Canadian
“Precisely.”
our Creator. But to find, all at once, right before your eyes, that
his flag, which a mild breeze was unfurling above his head. His eyes
The captain stopped suddenly. A gesture from him brought us to a halt,
and 40 degrees north. Their dominion extended even to Egypt. They
its wounds. The sea was dyed red, and through this opaque liquid I
funnels, spangling the air with stars.
“I have your word, Ned,” I answered the Canadian.
ancient times who drank pearls in vinegar.”
on. “Now we’ve got those circumstances. This evening we’ll be just a
**Author’s Note: And sure enough, there’s now talk of such a
degrees 37’ south and longitude 37 degrees 53’ west. These were the
eddies of the billows.
mood! The Nautilus no longer kept to a fixed heading. It drifted back
billows. The skies were threatening, but land lay inside those dense
disappeared just as the chronometer said noon, we were right at the
mass: a pile of gigantic stone blocks, an enormous granite cliffside
own mother tongue to fling out one supreme plea! Among the Nautilus’s
Strait of Gibraltar by sunrise on the 18th.
“We’ll be quite comfortable here,” I told Conseil.
hands had spared no expense to amass every natural and artistic
On this occasion I witnessed one of the finest gunshots ever to thrill
Conseil was my manservant. A devoted lad who went with me on all my
in hosts of blossoming zoophytes, and over it all, not ivy but a heavy
the savages of New Caledonia! All that’s lacking is for them to be
waiting. Only the propeller’s vibrations disturbed the deep silence
from it the kinds of secrets that had been revealed to me by the seas
These words indicated that the commander pursued a policy impervious
although I promised you a stroll in my forests, I made no pledge to
We had arrived at the foot of a sturdy clump of dragon trees, which
her arms. This woman was young. Under the brilliant lighting of the
toward them!
“But it must be clear to them,” I exclaimed, “that they’re dealing
waves, couldn’t we all die of asphyxiation? Were this ship and
“Mobilis in Mobili”
mine, his eyes gave me a friendly greeting. But this lofty plateau
“The sea itself?”
led us to the cell where we had spent our first night aboard the
a lagoon or small inner lake that gaps place in contact with the
Conseil needed no encouraging. Bending over the glass cases, the
motion.
detected? A ghastly uneasiness stole through me. I tried in vain to
“Even so, Ned, people mention vessels that narwhale tusks have run
spotted little violets that still gave off a subtle fragrance, and I
adorned by jellyfish from the genus Porpita wearing collars of azure
daily arc, the masts were populated with sailors whose feet itched and
and I did the same, but not without hearing the Canadian toss us a
eaten! So imprisonment wasn’t enough to conceal Captain Nemo’s plans
person. No museum in Europe owns such a collection of exhibits from
“The earth doesn’t need new continents, but new men!”
CHAPTER 19
Mr. Land that danger isn’t to be feared. His eye is sharp, his arm is
“No, sir,” he answered me, “but we’ll discover it together. Where
over that immense expanse? By then the Nautilus lay hundreds of miles
formed by the long curve of little Mannar Island. To reach it we had
returning in his tracks. But here it was just as impossible to turn
“Fine, Professor Aronnax, that’s wisely said.”
November 16, 1867
effort to prevent supplies from reaching Mohammed ibn Abdullah, who
didn’t have “the feel” of a fellow countryman.
American shore. We could hope to be picked up. So it was a promising
“We have no idea,” Conseil replied.
reverse steam immediately, the Abraham Lincoln beat to port, sweeping
clam.
novel an air of documentary realism. What’s more, Verne adds backbone
pity on these ferocious cetaceans. They’re merely mouth and teeth!”
for my signal. The oars, mast, and sail are in the skiff. I’ve even
“By thunder!” Ned Land shouted. “I’ll never promise I won’t try
unknown to the rest of the world, some nation could have been testing
push on to the Antarctic pole? Finally, would he return to the seas of
they were cut across by deep pits that had to be cleared. Masses of
again, my friends, my modest quarters by the Botanical Gardens, my
caught up in the most ridiculous ichthyological fantasies.
Dumont d’Urville’s sloops of war and the Nautilus.”
*Author’s Note: Tenders are small steamboats that assist the big
consulting me on the phenomenon in question. In France I had published
the family Pinnipedia, order Carnivora, group Unguiculata, subclass
colder waters. Murky as well, and very rich in saline material, their
his voyages to circumnavigate the globe, his double attempt at the
Equipped with picks, some ten men climbed onto the Nautilus’s sides
atmospheres (corresponding to a depth of fifty meters), and the
“You’re right, Conseil.”
night. The cold was brisk. The constellations were glittering with
After a few moments of silence, which none of us would have dreamed of
between Arabia and the Indian peninsula and providing access to the
only $1.50, but you can absolutely trust me on this, professor, its
remember that a quintillion is to a billion what a billion is to one,
“Ahoy! There’s the thing in question, abreast of us to leeward!”
active condition on the 167th meridian at latitude 77 degrees 32’.
frightened off by the mere sight of this monster aground in the bay,
treading underfoot one of the mountains of that continent! My hands
battle with the devilfish all made me see things in a different
belong to the class of cartilaginous fish, they rate as a delicacy;
wouldn’t pain me to eat a couple slices of fresh venison!”
by removing from each trunk an inch-thick strip of bark that covered a
contracting their bodies, clumsily helped by their imperfectly
his sextant and took his sights with the utmost precision. The
density—despite my heavy clothing, copper headpiece, and metal soles,
retreat?”
benevolence a dark underside—the man’s obsessive hate for his old
It was eight o’clock in the morning. By 8:30 we were suited up for
rivaled the most luxuriant carpets woven by the hand of man. But while
“Yes! The mussels of certain streams in Scotland, Wales, Ireland,
“Another use for electricity: that dial hanging before our eyes
We had been gone from the Nautilus for about an hour and a half. It
The Pros and Cons
translucency. In certain parts of the Caribbean Sea, you can see the
“You saw that?” the Canadian asked.
from the genus Tetradon unique to these seas: southern puffers with
vertical leagues down, the Nautilus passed below the limits of
“keep the pressure mounting!”
blame myself. Was our presence on board perhaps a burden to him? Even
By then it was ten o’clock in the morning. The sun’s rays hit the
surrounded by a coral reef whose circuit measured forty miles. We were
10 meters long, separated from the captain’s stateroom by a second
shouldn’t be subject to any rise in temperature. I looked at the
surface of the sea has solidified into ice, its lower strata are still
high as 200 feet; farther off, a succession of steeply cut cliffs
“Yes.”
“Stones don’t fall from the sky,” Conseil said, “or else they deserve
The battle between sperm whales and baleen whales had already begun
“And how, Ned,” I asked, “do you know that’s so?”
obstacles for us! Let’s shatter this Ice Bank! Let’s blow it up, and
we could die of hunger in this iron cage?”
certain individuals who aren’t so finicky about the sort of game they
telescope I habitually used. Leaning my elbows on the beacon housing,
One of the Nautilus’s men presented me with a streamlined rifle whose
now have a chance to actually look at them. Let’s.”
current moves at a speed of four kilometers per hour. The unchanging
sun’s rays. The radiant orb cleared the eastern horizon. Under its
dorsal and anal fins; grunts on which gold and silver mingle their
“No, sir,” I answered with conviction. “Not even angel-wing clams or
indisposition?—I felt extremely hot and had to take off my jacket made
keep going, because you fill me with fascination.”
Higginson and the Christopher Columbus had observed it at two
bubbling like water in a boiler. I leaned my hand against one of the
it were launched with the speed of an express train against a ship’s
“Won’t they come inside the Nautilus?”
Galen.
hanging on the wall. The compass still showed our heading as
I was hurled to the carpet.
“And what are you going to do?”
reverberating from the organ, which he played very expressively, but
cleared 20,000 leagues in this underwater tour of the world that has
had now earned the right to pen the definitive book on the sea, and
“That’s an offer I can’t refuse!” the harpooner replied.
“Correct,” he said. “You’re right, professor, and your captain’s a
Three-quarters of an hour later, we had completed our circular stroll
back up must have been impossible.
water, while the other two were rounded into palms and spread to the
the boat then displaces 1,507.2 metric tons—or it weighs that much—and
“That electricity alone can give me,” Captain Nemo said swiftly. “Sir,
collections and works of art it contains.”
to the genus Aspidophoroides, whose bodies are covered with scaly
retreated, putting us outside the range of the vessel’s shells. But
the monster, the monster put in no further appearances. For two months
wrested from the Incas and those peoples conquered by Hernando Cortez!
By then the thermometer gave -7 degrees centigrade outside. Captain
outpouring. Had he let himself get carried away, past the bounds of
Was it a vow of repentance that had just escaped from this man’s
burst these tracts of ice imprisoning us, just as its freezing can
been slaughtered by Russian troops. Nemo builds a fabulous futuristic
“Bah!” Conseil put in philosophically. “We can hold out a good while
to the masts, writhed beneath the waters. It was a human anthill that
“So the southern right whale is still unknown to you. Until now it’s
aboard the Lord Clyde. In lighthearted countries, people joked about
more. For so many days now, these natural wonders and artistic
Conclusion
compass and log, it steered by dead reckoning.
other words, you’d be squashed as flat as if you’d just been yanked
rest content with it. So I’ll ask you for your own personal views.”
sufficiently long, and their tapering gradual enough, so that the
calamity.”
“Yes, I see,” Ned replied, growing more interested. “Because the water
the name of this ship. On April 16 of that same year, it joined the
salmon; semired wrasse sporting scales only at the bases of their
Suddenly I felt a mild jolt. I realized the Nautilus had come to rest
paradise, those of our Canadian huntsman remained
shears. What a freak of nature! A bird’s beak on a mollusk! Its body
and geologists don’t swallow such fairy tales. It’s the same with
vessels arrived in the Bay of Vigo on October 22, 1702. Despite his
“Quinto,” Conseil said, “the lophobranchians, which have fully formed,
white, the head rounded, the topside furnished with three fins, the
too, erratically drifting chunks collect from the ice breakup. Here a
enable us to drive out this noxious gas! There was no lack of
than that?”
much higher market value.
Nautilus. It gazed with enormous, staring eyes that were tinted sea
unfortunate companions.
members of the genus Balaenoptera furnished with dorsal fins, and like
“Which means,” the Canadian went on, “since I’ve never fished these
Clarie Coast at 64 degrees 40’. In 1838 the American Wilkes advanced
the horizon, and at a speed of twenty miles per hour, the Nautilus
you’ll undergo a pressure of 17,568 kilograms; at 320 feet, or ten
shrewdly classified into divisions and among which I noted the
“Oh, damnation!” Ned Land shouted, stamping his foot on the resonant
I was perfectly abreast of this question, which was the big news of
neighboring islands or from the mainland of Papua proper. However, I
Nautilus’s interior.
inner beach. There the local flora was represented by a wide carpet of
“Boiling water?” I exclaimed.
behind their heavy glass windows and I fell into an uncontrollable
golden disk, dispersing its last rays over this deserted continent and
but my narrative had no result other than Ned’s voicing deep regret
of themselves together with cuttlefish and argonauts. The naturalists
going down the gangways. I assumed that he was keeping to the
remember one thing: I owe everything to the ocean; it generates
“He was one of your great seamen,” the captain told me, “one of your
I stared, wild-eyed. I saw the fight enter a new phase. The captain
single human being consumes all the oxygen found in 100 liters of air,
superior, in my view, to the one that says these madreporic edifices
“But where’s he going?” I asked.
pencil has so terrifyingly depicted.
Initially, Verne’s narrative was influenced by the 1863 uprising of
every thirty feet of depth. For instance, to go 1,000 meters down, I
To be sure, I had confidence in this devoted lad. Ordinarily, I never
assured that there was no danger of it solidifying.
which each day seemed like a century, the Abraham Lincoln plowed all
hands in a sign of final farewell. . . .
“Aegri Somnia”*
I hesitated to speak my mind.
who occupy all Malaysia,” Mr. de Rienzi has said; and I hadn’t the
in numbers and prominence. Polar birds nested on them by the
the world, whose first stages have been so magnificent. I want to
Atlantic, a second in the south Atlantic, a third in the north
yarns in far-away places.
Canada nor France, but securely aboard the Nautilus, fifty meters
fourteen forts, fashioned a three-kilometer girdle around it.
“So here we are, back on shore,” Conseil said.
years ago at the most, Captain Nemo had begun his underwater
protected by heavy glass, allowed us to see in any direction with
that my chances of ever seeing my fellow men again were shrinking by
animal. The oars hung suspended above their rowlocks. I was
the resistance of a stone block, as if it were completely solid. Its
only will the Nautilus float clear, it will go farther still!”
40,000 years!
forget, one slipup will finish us.”
and consequently his various instruments and equipment (staircases,
can accept?”
Society and the East India Company in his discovery. A ship named
opened by its powerful pincers. Here, under these clear waves, this
coming! Look here, Professor Aronnax, speak frankly. How long do you
Nautilus was straightening a bit. Objects hanging in the lounge were
tiling. The locks were turned, the door opened, the steward appeared.
But the Nautilus kept gravitating southward. On May 30, in sight of
through use of force, you had to be a harpooner.
“Well, Mr. Land,” the commander asked, “do you still advise putting my
midst of this turmoil, the Nautilus lived up to that saying of an
place of zinc in Bunsen cells. The mercury is never depleted. Only the
the iceberg was. From this point on, it was an issue of cutting out a
your flare-ups won’t give rise to any promising opportunities. So
Nemo doesn’t avoid the seas of civilization, and in a few days I think
rushing through my mind. Thus, led by the strangest of fates, I was
I took the wounded man’s pulse. It was intermittent. The body’s
“And do you know,” I added, “what happened since man has almost
sinking. These deserted waters were wonderfully clear, with a
“Well, look here! Lunch is served!”
“Right now, professor, the Nautilus is aground in ten meters of water,
Captain Nemo clenched his fists, and tears slid from his eyes, which I
brown. There I saw again, but not yet pressed and dried like the
swerving swiftly over the pressure gauge. Soon we had gone below the
new year’s gifts, and temporarily accept a hearty handshake in their
pointless, since I can rise to the surface of the sea whenever I
position. There were many English and French steamers plowing this
“With all due respect to master,” Conseil replied, “as comfortable as
ocean. Conseil rejoined me, and gluing his huge copper capsule to
As we skimmed the depths of the Grand Banks, I could see perfectly
when I leave this infernal Nautilus.”
phenomenon that had puzzled the whole scientific world, that had
The shellfish Meleagrina, that womb for pearls whose valves are nearly
his plans.
Captain Nemo decided to make for the ocean floor by submerging on an
enough to speak it correctly. Here, however, our overriding need was
swim and propel his partner forward. This towing role was to last no
Some minutes later it stopped at a depth of 833 meters and came to
the panels were open, he could still catch a glimpse of this submerged
date? Nothing, relatively speaking—since so far we’ve covered only
astronomer Hansteen, this magnetic pole is located fairly close to
appeared—whom I had already met during our first visit with the
elegant species of jellyfish; mollusks were represented by varieties
genus, and family, but no doubt I would complete my classifying with
power. Did its inventor meet up with Captain Nemo?
believe that humanity no longer thinks or writes. In any event,
“Damnation!” he exclaimed. “I’ve been struck by a lightning bolt!”
crewmen would be coming with us on this excursion. Captain Nemo hadn’t
its rays. That kindly light rekindled our strength. I held up my head
curiosities in these seas completely eluded our observation.
free-moving jaws but whose gills consist of little tufts arranged in
board decided to cut the cable before fishing it up, and by eleven
momentum, the ship sometimes mounted on top of these tracts of ice and
nearest land was the island group of the Bahamas, scattered like a
“Professor,” he said to me, “would it be convenient for you to make an
to me:
plants, I noted some delightful pink-colored, star-shaped alcyon
extract even the smallest pearls.”
reddened the waters with their crimson hue, treelike basket stars of
hopelessly tangled, the submersible would rise above it like an
automatically pretty limited. Yet everyone still felt confident of
the way of a reply. I was concerned about Captain Nemo’s absence
“But that’s simply an olive shell of the ‘tent olive’ species, genus
hadn’t yet had the opportunity to study. Among cartilaginous fish:
“Charge them to ten atmospheres.”
and long duck guns with exploding bullets that can mortally wound even
these ingenious insects so common to all the Canary Islands, where
slope. Petrified shrubs rambled here and there in sprawling
“We’re sinking! We’re sinking!”
This said in a carefree tone, Captain Nemo left the lounge.
CHAPTER 21
untroubled by their enormous weight or their powerful grip.
ceremonies when their arrival in the river’s waters announced the
nineteen chief islands in the island group of the Laccadives, located
I went below to the lounge. I found no one there. I ventured a knock
“What about master’s collections?” Conseil ventured to observe.
if my hands came near the moving flowers of these sensitive, lively
“Yes,” I said, “2,000,000 francs, and no doubt all it cost our captain
None of the weeds carpeting the seafloor, none of the branches
replied by three times lowering and hoisting the American flag, whose
devoured, even in all decency, so I’ll keep on my guard, especially
directs it to a specially designed lantern. In this lantern one finds
nature. Our globe began with the sea, so to speak, and who can say we
And in only a few years, how many victims have been furnished to the
spotted the crew of this boat. By any chance, could they be electric
feet.
whole gam! And I can’t do a thing! I’m tied hand and foot!”
bearings were reported on the chart, I saw that we were off the island
element.
pilothouse. Seated on the ledge furnished by the hull of the skiff, I
signaled me to follow him.
required them to drop anchor at the port’s offshore mooring. The sun,
casualty until the month of October. Then he left Vanikoro, headed
misunderstood genius who, tired of the world’s deceptions, had been
“Well thought out, Mr. Land,” I replied. “But as yet, I don’t believe
the largest fish were nothing more than ill-defined shadows, when the
ocean depths! You attacked me! You’ve just stumbled on a secret no
philosophically.
A few minutes before the sun passed its zenith, Captain Nemo raised
the bellies of sharks; as the ancients tell it, when these little fish
pelagica, like big, oblong bladders with a pearly sheen, spreading
“How beautiful!” Conseil exclaimed.
another was ready to go off.
this order at the same time he commanded the Nautilus to pick up
“Easy. They fix things so they stay there.”
So I had to resign myself to my fate and get ready to escape. My
billions?”
taken to the cabin that had been set aside for me.
eleven o’clock in the morning, when the heads of coral began to
The captain stared at me, crossing his arms.
when he regained his five senses, that eternal classifier mumbled in a
it backward at a speed of four meters per second. Its stern was
as if scrawled with undulating lines of copper sulfate. Others looked
narwhale. But one of them, the captain of the Monroe, knew that Ned
“It’s pointless to run any risks, professor. The Nautilus will suffice
you. This is one of those voyages from which people don’t always come
that hard to believe. I know that some divers can last up to
“How ingenious,” Conseil said, “to reduce dividing and classifying
“Anyhow,” Ned shot back, “if it isn’t this fellow, maybe it’s one of
immeasurably increased by some unknown system of levers?** This was
boatman pulled alongside in a dugout canoe and sold Dillon a silver
disappeared. Although the harpoon had been forcefully hurled, it
windows, but the heat was so great, I had to snatch it back.
three miles, leaving a phosphorescent trail comparable to those swirls
were, I still wondered how he could see—and what he had seen. My heart
“Humph!” Ned Land put in, his tone denoting reservations.
Papuan Islands where we ran into more savages than venison! On this
The steaming water was injected into the icy water outside, and after
miraculously, we escaped a danger greater than encountering a tiger
maneuvers began for reaching those strata so prodigiously far removed.
real mess call, by thunder! I’m not saying fish aren’t good for you,
answer can be taken for granted. But no solemn promises bind us to the
understand?
The Coral Realm
“Take a good look,” Ned went on. “There, ahead to starboard, almost
distance.
exceeded the dimensions of anything then known to ichthyologists, if
“Noon,” he said. “Professor, whenever you’re ready. . . .”
“But captain—”
strata located 2,000 meters underwater. The thermometer indicated a
that we definitely were not. I didn’t see any way out of this
halt; and they wasted three long weeks crossing this sector.
event?”
The next day, January 26, we cut the equator on the 82nd meridian and
world’s greatest rivers: the St. Lawrence, Mississippi, Amazon, Plata,
portrait of a still-youthful woman with two little children. Captain
The Maelstrom! Could a more frightening name have rung in our ears
Brachyura, Macrura, and Anomura. These names may look a tad fierce,
plating can’t give way; it’s self-adhering and not dependent on the
located miles beneath the surface of the water, it needs to have a
was darkness, but such utter darkness that after several minutes, my
body. Better armed than a baleen whale, whose upper jaw is adorned
bow. Then, a few seconds later, the waters splashed astern of the
constitution of these animals? It’s almost beyond conjecture.
people against whom ancient Greece had waged its earliest wars!
When I stood up, I saw Captain Nemo and his chief officer on the
“Master is too kind,” Conseil replied.
would prove too difficult to capture, when the animal got the untimely
“Me?” Conseil said. “I’m afraid I must be frank with master.”
“Anyhow,” the harpooner said, “I’m as hungry as all Hades, and dinner
within reach of our adroit hunter, who promptly took possession of
cold surface of the water. Captain Nemo headed toward the peak, which
“In essence, the year before, the royal houses of Holland, Austria,
observed and classified his zoophytes, articulates, mollusks, and
“You!” I said. “You!”
By then it was three o’clock in the afternoon. The current was
features, their sensitive expressions equal to those of the loveliest
“Sir,” I said, “you’re surely unaware of the discussions that have
“And these other instruments, whose functions I can’t even guess?”
his course, would go around each obstacle or would hug the walls and
single word shackle me to his vessel!
lion would lift a deer. We were thrown on top of each other, and I
“Yes, Professor Aronnax, and you have every right to be proud of your
since his skin, pale rather than ruddy, indicated tranquility of
monster?”
spotted a coconut palm, beat down some of its fruit, broke them open,
The Tantrums of Ned Land
imprisonment under the ice faded from our minds. We had thoughts only
momentum, it lunged through and onto this frozen surface, crushing the
tone. “No vehement phrases will leave my mouth, no vicious gestures
yellow-green gilthead, half a decimeter long and tasting like dorado,
“So, Mr. Ned, I see that this bread is all we need—”
“In this instance our friend Ned is right,” Conseil said, “and I side
reckonings obtained by the general staff of Commodore Fitz-James
bond issue. It sold out immediately. Another cable was put down under
healthy. It’s an immense wilderness where a man is never lonely,
are sheltered, nurtured, flattered, pampered, and offered a ritual
under our hull. At any instant a collision could have occurred that
South Pole, which led to his discovery of the Adélie Coast and the
saturate my brain. I tried to keep my eyes open, but they closed in
At seven o’clock the log told me that the Nautilus had reduced
for our interview.
Sadova. Through the mists on the 27th, it sighted the port of Heart’s
chain, the board on its stern eaten away by marine salts! How many
the chief substance making up this immense shoal. And here’s why these
species, whose length sometimes exceeds twenty-four feet. The family
“Very nice, Conseil,” I replied, “but these two genera of seals and
the midst of this placid natural setting, sky and ocean competed with
“Well,” I said, “these are real devilfish caverns, and I wouldn’t be
So I called Conseil to my side, while at an average depth of eight to
“You expect us to fall for that?” the Canadian asked, tipping me a
“11,000,000! I refuse to accept that until I count them myself.”
titles don’t really qualify as sci-fi: Around the World in Eighty Days
it by the 9th parallel off the northwestern shores of Ceylon. It was
what gamblers regret the most isn’t the loss of their money so much as
himself half out of the water, then fell back exhausted.
Look at it stealing away!) People claim these animals can circle
specimens; with their smooth, viscous filaments, they measured as much
locomotion.
fish?”
which was promptly accepted. The Canadian got into his underwater
“A word of caution, Mr. Land,” I told the harpooner, who was about to
This said, Captain Nemo went to a cabinet standing near the lounge’s
“Then let’s keep hunting,” Conseil replied, “but while heading back to
I couldn’t help smiling as Conseil wiped himself out of
shores?”
engineers put their heads together, then posted a warning that if the
ocean depths!
“I’ve detected as much, captain,” I replied, “and if it gets even
topside, a dainty pink on its belly, and armed with three stings
“Many people, Ned my friend,” I said.
iron wall made of riveted boilerplate. Then, turning around, I bumped
closing the opening in the skiff, the Canadian began to unscrew the
more than two miles off, and it would be child’s play for the Canadian
“Two genera,” our scholarly Conseil hastened to say, “that belong to
north Atlantic basin? Always at incalculable speed! Always amid the
3,000 feet, its average width sixty miles. In certain localities its
olive-colored tresses of their tentacles.
“Even so,” he went on, “Captain Nemo can’t go south forever! He’ll
thanks at the local temple.”
The name Sargasso comes from the Spanish word “sargazo,” meaning
“What can we do, Ned, since it isn’t feasible to escape right now?”
I went looking in the library for a book about this island, one of the
“Yes,” I replied. “Apparently the tunnel has no way out at this end.”
mind’s eye.
Will anyone believe me? I don’t know. Ultimately it’s
has rooted in their heads like a hairpiece of pneumatic
As for me, I was no longer content with the hypotheses that satisfied
deeper and deeper strata.”
All at once his arm shot forward and the harpoon was launched. I heard
“Bad, very bad!” the harpooner replied.
The frigate then went along the New Jersey coast—the wonderful right
This reply told me nothing. I bowed, and the commander went on:
“Fine. Stoke your furnaces and clap on full steam!”
“Correct,” I replied. “Under existing conditions some ten men at the
“They’re an insult to a frying pan!” the Canadian exclaimed.
After two hours of work, reentering to snatch some food and rest, I
groups, the polyps and the echinoderms. In the first group: organ-pipe
“Either fighting or playing.”
walls. Via this strand you could easily circle the lake. But the base
navigational undertaking has been conducted with more ability, no
in moving flowers.
“Only if they’re attacked,” I replied. “But when these giant seals
lower down, while diving beneath that surface, isn’t your submersible
Luckily these voracious animals have poor eyesight. They went by
us.
areas. It’s going back toward Europe, let it take us there. After we
of the Stomach, and savoring its ingenious teachings, when Conseil
which allow me to calculate my longitude; and finally, spyglasses for
helps to concentrate their oxygen content.”
It’s moving back and forth! It’s darting at us!”
manservant should face them with him!”
invariable success. Others have been wrenched, not without difficulty,
sites where ships have gone down, whose positions are marked on my
the glass of our port panel; it consisted of a long, lean filament
consists of the decapods, in other words, animals whose head and
“Calm down, Mr. Land! And you, professor, kindly listen to me!”
“See!” the harpooner exclaimed. “There’s nothing to see, nothing we’ll
deep into the polar seas or back to Oceania, I say we should leave
Sperm Whales and Baleen Whales
don’t see what could stop us from taking advantage of it. If there are
“Like in the voyages of Sinbad the Sailor,” I answered, laughing. “Oh,
could be. That day I pressed him no further. The Scotia’s accident was
nothing will prevent the professor from attending, and he looks
“But not the air you breathe?”
slippery rascal had waylaid some passing telegram and was making the
understood: “Glory to God in the highest, and peace on earth to men of
By noon we were no farther along than at eight o’clock in the morning.
the continent? Who was the recipient of Captain Nemo’s gold?
whale and the black right whale by the fusion of its seven cervical
blunt instrument, leaving the naked brains exposed, and the cerebral
again, then tried the knob. The door opened.
flash, not the noise.
dorados accented with gold and silver, rainbow-hued parrotfish that
that can equal this safe refuge for withstanding the fury of
The cold-temperature poles and the geographical poles don’t coincide
slightest feeling of dizziness. Sometimes I leaped over a crevasse
sea. Its wound hadn’t weakened it because it went with tremendous
Cape.
volcano has changed into a peaceful cavern.”
gathered and gloom overran the sea until the moon came up.
bellows, such as a herd of cattle might produce.
to play its stabilizing role. Attaining a white heat in the Gulf of
air compressed inside the craft sent its decks flying, as if the
“Admiral de Chateau-Renault was so indecisive as to obey this
“Yes, my boy, and don’t even try to compute the number of these
to a halt. Classifying was everything to him, so he knew nothing
the liquid medium, reverberated with majestic amplitude.
displaced water easily slips past and poses no obstacle to the ship’s
“In the second place, because oxygen is the basis of life, and we know
must have been produced by a perforating tool of uncommon
or in prehistoric monsters living at the earth’s core, but astronomers
fearsome fishing gear, but nobody knew where to steer it. And
the waves. This valley is closed off to the east by a sheer wall 2,000
some naturally slow animal the ability to move swiftly if it hadn’t a
nationality.
skiff. Conseil and I will be inside waiting for you.”
hitting granite reefs. I saw a few that had sunk straight down, their
Conseil kept especially busy observing mollusks and articulates, and
“Why not?”
of the sea?”
liters of air, which, divided by 2,400 . . .”
water coming out of their noses and ears is tinted with blood. I
of the sea?”
waters like the whitish reflections of many moons.
“I will,” Captain Nemo replied icily. “You’re ill-advised to pass
this man. With his eye and his throwing arm, he was worth the whole
Such was the region our Nautilus was visiting just then: a genuine
a man on the eve of his eternal exile, a man departing to return no
filled in for good in 761 or 762 A.D. by Caliph Al-Mansur, in an
the sea. We’ve arrived at the foothills of these mountains, and I
Meanwhile shells fell around us in increasing numbers. Some, meeting
the Nautilus’s chief officer was pronouncing his daily phrase. It then
it after we reentered the first cell. Then he pressed a button. I
repeated. Hoisted on board, the longboat was readjusted into its
from the captain, but neither do I share Conseil’s views. We’re privy
double ultramarine of sky and water, tomorrow bad-tempered and
streaks, hard lines, fiery furrows, all scrawled by our speeding
perched on a promontory connected to the continent by a narrow
One morning—whose date I’m unable to specify—I was slumbering near the
their time and energy, so he ended the hunt by diving beneath the
Meanwhile our silent steward, perhaps a deaf-mute, set the table and
already charged with carbon dioxide. The air hadn’t been renewed in
replied. “I only need twenty-five minutes to serve you one of my own
to double Cape Horn.
. . . save our strength . . . !”
impeded by the thickness of those walls. It was futile to attack the
whose name means “Gate of Tears” in the Arabic language. Twenty miles
- CENTIMETER Roughly 2/5 of an inch
locomotive power, and the unique vitality with which it seemed to be
the anchor connecting the seafloor with the Nautilus’s skiff.
And in truth, the ocean was deserted. Not a sail on the horizon. The
protrudes from the topside of the Nautilus’s hull and is fitted with
To this no reply was possible. After breakfast I made my way to the
fish, order Chondropterygia with fixed gills, family Selacia, genus
solid ground, we’ll figure out a course of action. Besides, it
occurred and I was able to observe its every phase. The islet of
At 2:35 Captain Nemo appeared in the lounge.
life-giving sea air. Next to me my two companions were getting tipsy
me, a camera was carried into the lounge at Captain Nemo’s
ice whose limits we couldn’t see.
how heavily this protracted imprisonment was weighing on him. I could
“Because . . . it just couldn’t be true!” the Canadian replied,
petrified scorpions, transparent glass snails, argonauts, some highly
stranger’s eyes, and I glimpsed a fearsome past in this man’s
some new kind of induction coil? Could its transmission have been
over the coals, those cutlets from the “bari-outang” soon gave off a
The Nautilus was certainly afloat, but it was no longer in motion. The
“Commander La Pérouse set out on December 7, 1785, with his ships, the
Then the pallbearers approached. Wrapped in white fabric made from
masterworks had been central to my life, and I was about to leave them
back a shudder of horror. Just then Conseil woke up, together with the
These words explained everything to me. It wasn’t just a railing that
waters hadn’t yet torn loose, whose vegetation grew in wild
fingerlike. With reasonable accuracy, they lived up to their nicknames
the surface, your pumps must overcome that pressure of 100
“I didn’t ask for such a promise, Mr. Land,” the commander replied
Mammalia, subclass Monodelphia, group Pisciforma, order Cetacea,
these live birds with your bare hands!”
followed him with my eyes.
Nautilus’s hull. We tilted. The ice cracked with an odd ripping sound,
“Luck plus logic, professor, and logic even more than luck.”
Very cordially yours,
bizarre animal can electrocute other fish from several meters away, so
As for fish, they were numerous and often remarkable. Here are the
stern.
glasses. Sometimes the murky ocean sparkled beneath moonbeams that
in density from sea to sea. I said no, adding that there was a lack of
and a third for venison, of which I still haven’t glimpsed the tiniest
polyparies that congregate to form entire islands that will one day
appeared in a 1922 juvenile edition published by Rand McNally &
Conseil’s hands, and holding it like precious porcelain from China,
to attract it, beguile it, and draw it more surely than if he had it
Strait, it’s quite simply because there’s some passageway from the one
“I’ve even heard stories,” the Canadian said, “about some lady in
way. The Nautilus’s powerful pumps forced air down into the tanks and
He didn’t reply.
emerge above the waves to one-tenth of its total capacity, I empty all
“Quite simply.”
Aleutian Islands, carrying along trunks of camphor trees and other
underwater boat, and here are its exact subdivisions going from
“That would be gambling with the lives of my men.”
“In a kettle, no,” the Canadian shot back, “but in an oven for
But in the meantime I would have to look for this narwhale in the
induction coil and the glass spiral, and the sea, lit up by our four
had been invaded and partly destroyed by the Atlanteans. These
distasteful to both of us. So let’s finish what we’ve started. I
us go overboard; and even if they had, the frigate—being undone by its
have words with it.”
choice but to accept both the Rouquayrol and Ruhmkorff devices, I’d
Among these books I noted masterpieces by the greats of ancient and
gone!”
hull? Was it unintentionally that Mr. Ned Land hit me with his
where storms are commonplace, the very homeland of tornadoes and
close after us, and we were surrounded by profound darkness.
enough of its hidden wonders, its fish and zoophytes, its gardens of
pennant streaming from the peak of its mainmast.”
their food, and without further ado I did the same. By now I felt
“You were thrown overboard after the frigate’s collision?”
they belong to the class Cephalopoda, family Dibranchiata, consisting
men on board.
could see long creepers and gigantic fucus plants, bulb-bearing
the grip of an intense homesickness that could be cured only by our
This said, Captain Nemo headed to the hatch and disappeared down the
logical order, and I had strayed into the most absurd hypotheses, when
such a fearsome machine. The Chassepot rifle led to the torpedo, and
floating pole and a chain laced through the lower meshes. Trailing in
conduct experiments, let’s conduct them.”
“Fine, Conseil! And I agree that there are honorable cannibals who
above all, don’t let them lead you to flare up against our hosts,
Nautilus would immediately break free. If not, many months might pass
light. I no longer felt the enthusiasm of our first days on board. You
still there to let us in!”
any sovereign ever possessed one superior to the pearl owned by
I stared in the direction of the ship I had spotted. It was heading
“By thunder! In ’65, just two and a half years ago, I to whom you
stupidly sacrificed.
bit dubious anyhow—and headed toward the Admiralty Islands, which had
however great, held a perennial attraction for his aggressive nature.
the workmen. Even today as I write these lines, my sensations are so
reenacted under identical conditions. Only, thanks to the nationality
had thus gone ninety meters below the limit that nature had, until
“Perhaps,” Conseil said, “but in a nutshell, the Nautilus can hold
“Not at all. But being in master’s employ, I followed master.”
“They’re cannibals even so, my boy.”
head, inside big cavities separated by cartilage, you’ll find 300 to
twenty holes.”
colors. Then, as specimens of other genera, blowfish resembling a dark
“That’s perfect.”
“Oh,” Conseil put in, “there are some people so unintelligent by
“But it isn’t a rifle that uses gunpowder,” the captain replied.
crowded with marine mammals as far as the eye could see, and I
I stared at the Nautilus’s commander with an air anything but
“It can’t be!” Conseil exclaimed.
slowly. At a depth of 1,000 feet, it stopped. Its propeller churned
tanks full, it was sitting at a depth of 1,000 meters in a
which you needn’t answer if it’s indiscreet. The electric cells you
some of the most useful produce in the tropical zones supplied us with
positive that those clouds kept at a moderate altitude, because this
fivescore good reasons for renaming itself the Argus, after that
The other replied with a shake of the head and added two or three
sea, such animals would need to be just as strong as you say—if they
In these waterways our nets brought up fine samples of algae, in
After the door to my stateroom was closed, he sat and stared at me
Captain Nemo showed me to a bench.
sailors—that muscular man who had gone with us to Crespo Island during
of his tether.”
CHAPTER 3
Brittany, then finally dubbed the Falklands by the English, to whom
unveiled. And now, even though his identity was still unknown, at
“If it’s over with!” Ned Land muttered.
“Without ill effect. We’re no longer in motion.”
“It won’t take a minute,” the Canadian replied.
There Conseil’s work came to a halt. He didn’t have time to finish off
during the reign of King Charles V, but now they bring in only
of a sun half drowned in mist. Beyond, a stark silence reigned in this
northerly. The log indicated a moderate speed, the pressure gauge a
which it would be placed (baleen whale, sperm whale, or dolphin), the
There are two currents here: an upper current, long known to exist,
live the Republic!’”
the Nautilus would attack the double-decker on the surface of the
then make for the Cape of Good Hope.”
Atlantic route.
diverging tips, those inachus scorpions that—lord knows why—symbolized
close enough for us. Until tomorrow then.”
way to counter Captain Nemo’s whims. We had no choice but to
still the right feathers, and so long as the merchandise isn’t meant
“Then we’ll die together, Ned my friend.”
By then we were passing between Sicily and the coast of Tunisia. In
mentions some amanthia crabs whose fronts were armed with two big
some naturalists still believe, but an animal of the lowest order, a
this underwater tunnel was obstructed by such blocks and didn’t make
baby whale that it had been unable to rescue from the slaughter. Its
colds. Besides, the ship had a good stock of the madrepore
globe!”
“Mercy, look at these cod!” he said. “Why, I thought cod were flat,
pass away, and the scientist continue his peaceful exploration of the
As for marine mammals, on passing by the mouth of the Adriatic Sea, I
Lincoln heaved to, its longboats radiated in every direction around it
“What! You have a skiff?” I replied in some astonishment.
“As simple as that.”
sheet-iron monster, had obviously just risen to the surface of the
stars trailing from the tail end of Orion.
platform. I was quite impatient to clear Captain Nemo’s tunnel,
dangers of navigating this Red Sea?”
question.”
up any rarities. Our dragnet was filled with Midas abalone, harp
“With my own two eyes.”
beasts! But there are stories of gigantic sperm whales. They’re shrewd
graphite points between which the luminous arc expanded. This was an
all aquiver, genuine masterpieces of jewelry, formerly sacred to the
find something better? Can’t you or one of your men—”
*Latin: “in a class by itself.” Ed.
with dark fire, his eyes had shrunk beneath his frowning brow. His
without breaking away from its crude starting point.”
up with me, and we returned to the middle of this cabin, which had to
“My views are fully formed,” Ned Land shot back. “They’re rogues!”
of a hunter who, from the viewpoint of his art, gives the game a
noctiluca an eighth of an inch wide, actual globules of transparent
which the white of its houses and forts stood out sharply. I spotted
of fresh water by 1.000, then I find 1.028 for the waters of the
“No, let me do it. Tomorrow—”
was complete and had brought on a paralysis of movement and sensation.
completely regain that bygone importance that the Suez railways have
The Nautilus
gigantic scale. Our Creator cast them using a colossal mold that time
“Islet?”
consist of only three orders.”
NOW WE BEGIN the second part of this voyage under the seas. The first
motion. Just such a basin is the Atlantic Ocean to the Gulf Stream,
Now then, it did exist, this was an undeniable fact; and since the
by collectors; a whole series of top-shell snails—greenish yellow ones
butt was boilerplate steel, hollow inside, and of fairly large
“Genus Balistes, family Scleroderma, order Plectognatha,” Conseil
there we’ll easily find refuge. Oh, I grant you, if the Nautilus had
Conseil was in dead earnest, but I didn’t subscribe to his
and we rushed onto the platform.
the Nautilus’s exact heading. Now then, that evening it became
labored, and muscle spasms quivered in his face. Cerebral inflammation
At the captain’s summons, two crewmen came to help us put on these
taken your studies as far as terrestrial science can go. But you don’t
The Canadian looked carefully.
calm surface of the ocean.
“But,” I asked, “are we at least back on the surface of the sea?”
elements in the water, and since they create coral and madrepores,
its spur. The admission of additional water was enough to shift its
“Oh, the rascal!” Conseil exclaimed. “I’d rather he cracked my
the bowhead whale you’ve hunted, and it won’t risk going past the warm
classification. It will at least convey the quickness of my
following morning.
“Excellent, Ned,” I said, extending my hand to the Canadian.
motionless with arms crossed and legs outstretched, the other would
vanished into the northwest, we ran at full steam onto the dark waters
surface of the sea. But this return to the upper strata wasn’t so
“Here’s what I found at the very site of that final shipwreck!”
grizzled hair plastered to his brow, his hands clutching the wheel,
membrane-filled tubes trembling beneath the water’s undulations. I was
stated our names and titles; then, in order, I introduced Professor
Our wonderment stayed at an all-time fever pitch. Our exclamations
south. Captain Nemo stood up from his thwart and studied the sea.
collapsing walls, deserted thoroughfares, a whole Pompeii buried under
question. Like his master, like his comrade Ned, he’s a
diagonal. And similarly, if I want to return more swiftly to the
“I understand, captain, I understand your delight at strolling in the
unable to observe miralets, triggerfish, puffers, seahorses,
emerged above water. So the Ice Bank was higher here than we had found
taking his customary notes, and seemed unable to rest easy for an
squat mushrooms and for years had been classified among the zoophytes;
see how it will float off.”
compresses very little. In fact, according to the most recent
containers with potassium hydroxide and shake them continually. But
degrees and 15 degrees south, and between longitude 164 degrees and
“Correct, Ned Land, but I still want to know what’s behind this Ice
or even higher than the Himalayas or Mt. Blanc, and the extent of
returned on board, I was wellnigh asphyxiated by the carbon dioxide
CHAPTER 2
Our breakfast consisted of several dishes whose contents were all
Ned was right. It was too beautiful. All at once a yell from Conseil
me!”
level, because some connection had to exist between this lake and the
Nautilus’s hull, it could have been fatal to him.
most piercing yell a human throat can produce.
The electric light suddenly went out, and two enormous waterspouts
Sporades Islands, only when Captain Nemo placed his finger over a spot
the chase continued, and Captain Nemo was content to keep his
the different strata.”
“Or rather his bank vaults. By which I mean this ocean, where his
left behind only silence and death.
“And suppose he adds that this offer he’s making you today won’t ever
My eyes didn’t leave the pressure gauge. We kept rising on a diagonal,
sometimes emerging above the surface and throwing phosphorescent spray
vegetables would be well received in the Nautilus’s pantry.”
pale azure, clear of mists. North of us: the sun’s disk, like a ball
World. When the ships of that bold investigator arrived in the
latter interrupted his strolling and aimed his spyglass at the point
calculated—can build to 3,000 kilograms on every square foot of
undertaking was the least of my worries; my heart was pounding at the
he wanted.
thousand kilos of meat were hauled below, to be dried and stored.
to offer,’ either on its surface or in its depths. As a matter of
perfect likeness of the quartet near which it walked, but with heads
“Then, sir,” Ned Land said, “since Conseil is no more, we’ll have this
over the countryside; moreover, they’re just as voracious as dogfish,
thoracic fins plus black pectoral fins and a breastplate protected by
foe of his fellow man, toward whom he must have sworn an undying hate!
handkerchiefs were waving above these tightly packed masses, hailing
fearsome spur? Couldn’t it be launched diagonally against those tracts
took us to great depths, and I could see nothing of those high coral
species of triggerfish, the cucuyo whose stippled flanks glitter with
as their link. If we can trust tradition, it was probably Egypt’s King
and he’ll soon change Africa into an immense island.”
safe, we reached the fisherman’s longboat.
how your helmsman can—”
continent emerges at the pole, we’ll stop at that continent. But on
grounds for criticism.
Conseil had coolly reasoned out this hypothesis and laid his plans
iniquitous claims, battle each other, devour each other, haul every
No! Ned and Conseil, my two gallant friends, were sacrificing
crabs exclusive to these waterways, and horrible parthenope crabs
or fifteen miles beneath the surface of the water? What is the
from the new Astrolabe were steered to this locality, and after going
Captain Nemo went out. Hissing sounds soon told me that water was
battered to death, the monsters finally yielded to us and disappeared
“What’s this, Ned?” I asked. “You’d seriously consider taking over
classification, belonging to his second subclass of bony fish
companionway. The hatch was open. I ventured onto the platform. The
“What about the Papuans?”
the same year, by the Christopher Columbus from the West India &
As soon as I was dressed, I made my way to the main lounge. It was
A few strokes of the oar brought the skiff to the sand, where it ran
After a few minutes, the parts of the fruit exposed to the fire were
began to expel water from the ballast tanks. After a few minutes we
“Professor Aronnax,” the captain told me, “I beg you to share my
“So have I,” Conseil replied. “Accordingly, I think as much about
“What about this channel we’re in right now?” I asked.
“it’s like an actual isthmus connecting Europe to Africa.”
carefree tone, I asked, “By the way, gallant Ned, are you afraid of
“And I might add,” I said, “that when these birds are properly cooked,
“And now, Professor Aronnax, our own breakfast is ready. Allow me to
What a sight! How can I describe it! How can I portray these woods and
he had received me coolly but hospitably. Only, he never took the hand
consists of three families, baleen whales, sperm whales, dolphins, and
Nautilus’s sailors were waiting for us aboard the skiff, which was
too relentlessly pursued by hunters.
once, barely breathing, immersed like Captain Nemo in this musical
apparently had hit only water.
deliberately—by its captain. It was sweeping around in a spiral whose
Tuamotu Islands. In still other localities, such as Réunion Island and
amassed in the museum, this unrivaled collection doomed to perish
When I returned on board, I felt half suffocated. What a night! I’m
really existed, it wouldn’t have given me such a terrific mental
me, one hand grasping the martingale, the other brandishing his
A coral is a unit of tiny animals assembled over a polypary that’s
arrangement of their branches—an arrangement that I had never before
We disembarked, and thinking it best to abide by the Canadian’s
spotted or speckled with greenish dots, members of the genus Aplysia
butterfish called the fiatola decked out in thin gold stripes and the
would have tentacles as long as twenty-seven. Which is enough to make
However, one bird unique to these shores, which never passes beyond
form a vault shaped like an immense upside-down funnel that measured
“Well then, we’ll adjust our stomachs to the chef’s timetable!”
commercial centers along this coast, as the Arab historian Idrisi
“Nearly,” Conseil replied. “Savages.”
to my astonishment, this door was ajar. I instinctively recoiled. If
with wit, information, and insight. Verne regards the sea from many
a valuable foodstuff missing on board.
missing none of its death throes, was descending into the depths with
“I’m all ears, captain.”
Creator. They were huge stacks of stones in which you could
down not only ships but whales, and even polar bears from the
dearly beloved collections! But now nothing could hold me back. I
clean through, leaving behind two squirming animal halves. As for
“That’s also well put,” the Canadian replied. “But your proviso
after a heroic battle; its three masts gone, water in its hold, a
gigantic. Here and there stood sharp peaks, lean spires that rose as
I told my companions what had happened. They were as astonished as I
“What!” Conseil put in. “Squid, ordinary squid from the class
dropped dead on the spot.
inferior forces, Admiral de Chateau-Renault fought courageously. But
stake and transoceanic travel was suffering, the sincerity of these
moments later, the frigate’s two funnels vomited torrents of black
“11,000,000, my friend.”
question would have to be negotiated with the captain. But how would
with slim figures and a softly glowing radiance that Lacépède
During this phase of our voyage, Captain Nemo conducted interesting
Shattered, at the end of my strength, I slid flat on my belly to the
fearsome creature I’m up against, and I don’t want my frigate running
comparable to the green turtle.
concerned Captain Nemo’s matchless bravery, the other his devotion to
“Perfectly capable. Though fragile on impact, crystal can still offer
“With all due respect to master,” Conseil replied, “the Nautilus’s
water plants, animals for vegetables. And who hasn’t made the same
that these mines were genuinely inexhaustible, since nature’s creative
perfect consistency. It also heated a distilling mechanism that, via
free—iron stirrups, anchors, cannons, shells, tackle from a capstan, a
the species known by name as Ostrea lamellosa, whose members are quite
“Surely, but in extracting that silver, your expenses would outweigh
filaments, and jugfish, seven inches long, decked out in the brightest
Gibraltar and Ceuta, and in prehistoric times it closed off the
It is indeed a river that runs independently through the middle of the
The stopcocks of the ballast tanks were then opened wide, and 100
six pairs of walking legs. Conseil used the methods of our mentor
we used our slanting fins, which internal levers could set at an
“Especially once we’ve left him,” Ned Land shot back.
turned blue and faded in the midst of a hazy darkness. Truly, this
ever see from this sheet-iron prison! We’re simply running around
a species of Sterna nilotica unique to Egypt: beak black, head gray
contrivance into the sea, and it will go wherever the waves carry it.”
the French word for shark, requin, has its linguistic roots in the
“abrou” of the Malaysians, and some high-quality yams.
Three cheers greeted this order. The hour of battle had sounded. A few
spindle-shaped, and in some cases over three meters long, their
“That’s right,” I said, “I am a doctor, I used to be on call at the
library. Written in every language, books on science, ethics, and
veal. Their hunting was not a fascinating sport. The manatees let
dining room, a double door opened, and I entered a room whose
*German: “Bulletin.” Ed.
couldn’t be less in the way if he didn’t exist.”
It was a cabin measuring six feet square and closely resembling those
o’clock in the afternoon, and fresh ice kept forming over the ship’s
the Nautilus through that narrow passageway.”
seaweed of which the open sea at the pole had revealed a few
On March 14 at latitude 55 degrees, I spotted floating ice, plain pale
until we’re out of this blind alley.”
window of an immense aquarium.
prevent winds from carrying off excessive amounts of steam, which,
become untenable.
Nautilus’s lounge.
and it indicates the outside pressure on our hull, which in turn gives
imaginings of these storytellers there had to be, if not a cause, at
them hoist it up the iron companionway by means of pulleys.
The Canadian paused for a short while before replying. Then, crossing
raised us with irresistible power, lifting us into less congested
with swimming. He can rely on me to tow him to that vessel, if he’s
inroads.
those used off the Normandy coast, huge pouches held half open by a
I then understood Captain Nemo’s intent. By leaving the pearl buried
perfectly natural reply to these charges, and I made it.
been inside, steering his Nautilus himself.
Copyright (C) 1999, Frederick Paul Walter.
“And how will you prepare it?” I asked the Canadian.
hatches aren’t to be entered in that fashion even when they’re open.”
leave the surface of the sea, and its trawl brought up a simply
scientists. A gelatinous, semifluid substance coated the fibrous
brightness, but Captain Nemo stared straight at it, as if to inhale
*Latin: “Save Poland’s borders.” Ed.
the lower shelf of ice lay submerged.
I did seven months ago: whoever boards the Nautilus must never leave
lived inside this strange boat? What mechanical force allowed it to
“Or under it, Professor Aronnax.”
difference in temperature between its currents and the superimposed
captured half a dozen manatees. In essence, it was an issue of
the Bering Sea. Now I ask you, after it had been wounded west of
15. Accident or Incident?
weighing 200 kilos. They’re extremely valuable because of their
Before I had time to realize why the captain made this recommendation,
construction work going on under these waves.”
I wanted to run to the captain’s rescue. But I was transfixed with
“The one and the other,” Conseil said.
severed shrouds still hung from their clasps. Its hull looked in good
they’re none the worse for it.”
of crystal clarity, our ship enabled us to study wonderful bushes of
the minds of my companions. For my part, I stared at them with anxious
electric light flooding over us, I would have thought we were in the
“Never, Conseil.”
“A first-class barometer, my friend.”
the same year the Italian physicist Torricelli invented the barometer
“If you don’t mind, professor,” Captain Nemo told me, “we’ll determine
while, the captain said to me:
species Pelagia panopyra that, in the dark, would have strewn our path
fake ones, like people create fake pearls or diamonds.”
see, the ocean seemed lactified. Was it an effect of the moon’s rays?
we went along it in this fashion, staying only a few meters
is true, by the vista of $2,000.00) didn’t remain at rest for an
Conseil. At first I didn’t know what to make of this sudden assault,
was completely motionless. I dressed hurriedly and entered the main
blushing of the rising sun. That dreadful day of June 2 had dawned.
hunting a baleen whale that was in sight. Anxious to see Ned Land at
there is some animal, what chance would we have of spotting it? Can’t
content simply to avoid humanity! His fearsome submersible served not
shorten the route from Cadiz to the East Indies by 9,000 kilometers,
white, often opaque but sometimes of opalescent transparency, and
“As master wishes,” Conseil replied.
“And once we’re at the Cape of Good Hope?” the Canadian asked with
“it’s a dreadful sight for sure. But I’m a hunter not a butcher, and
captain, builder, and engineer all in one!”
mollusks. Then, lord knows why, they were gripped with a sudden
would have supplied enough building material to make a whole marble
with a loud clang.
reel like a drunk. My companions were experiencing the same
at a constant speed of 100 leagues every twenty-four hours. It was
“No help!” he replied with growing animation. “Sir, what makes you
undertake the arduous labors, the maneuvers d’Urville had to attempt
The ceiling lights in the lounge then went out, the panels opened, and
run aground; by the Arctic and the Lyonnais, sunk in collisions; by
patience, made no further appearances. Conseil couldn’t coax a single
Our strength returned promptly, and when I looked around, I saw that
“Ned my friend,” Conseil replied, “what harm could it do the Nautilus?
passed. A cataclysm occurred—floods, earthquakes. A single night and
still-active volcano.”
But, as it always happens, just when a decision had been made to chase
In a few seconds we were safe on top of the cave.
“Rifles! What for? Don’t your mountaineers attack bears dagger in
shatters under the water’s pressure, or those devices based on the
their work suffered because of it. I’m unwilling to say that there was
gurnards, and pinecone fish.
still.”
glided into the labyrinthine channels that separate the Maldive and
“There lies our peaceful cemetery, hundreds of feet beneath the
that long-lost navigator, the Count de La Pérouse. Then we raised the
most favorable conditions. By then it was the bad season in these
understand why water can freeze only at the surface!”
reason. Consequently, I hoped that some crewmen would soon make an
there!’ Me, I’m talking about right now: we are here, and we must take
hoped that behind all that fog there lay those shores he longed for.
triggerfish, leather jacks, unicornfish, and a hundred others that
and if this progression keeps up, I can’t imagine what its climax will
I couldn’t hold still. Frantic, going insane, I leaped out of my
some stretched out on the ground, others lying on drifting ice floes,
have the proportions determined by the officers of the Shannon, the
Suddenly, just as on the previous evening, Ned Land’s voice was
with the ocean’s waves. It was this current the Nautilus was about to
“Professor Aronnax,” he replied, “do you dare claim that your frigate
polypary, and for others, such as Professor Milne-Edwards, it’s a
“Yes,” I said, “it’s a sad occupation, and one that exists only to
coasts of America. And we found nothing! Nothing except an immenseness
you. You may inspect it in detail, and I’ll be delighted to act as
around the world in just fifteen days.”
“. . . order Hydromedusa,” Conseil muttered.
the cave’s calm waters. I estimated the weight of this giant clam at
essence, this ingenious American has noted that between the South Pole
“I’m awfully fond of you, Conseil my friend, but not enough to eat you
I would have stayed longer at my window, marveling at these beauties
I sat, and he began speaking as follows:
Land was all for jumping overboard. I forced him to wait. As I saw it,
“Exquisite!” Conseil replied.
said too much. But I had guessed. Whatever motives had driven him to
expressed in his facial features, the nobility of his bearing, all
Syria, Turkey, and the East Indies. I could distinguish with
ice beneath its weight.
the Bay of Vigo, Atlantis, the South Pole! During the night all these
“On the contrary, my respect is due you. Go to it, my boy.”
“Nothing can save him?”
12. Sperm Whales and Baleen Whales
slightly hotter, we won’t be able to stand it.”
Sea.
Land. He hurled at the hapless animal the most potent swearwords in
seventeen meters of water remaining above it, while the depth on
coral of the genus Virgularia from the waters of Norway, various coral
“No, sir.”
*Author’s Note: “Ladyfingers” are small, thin, white clouds with
how else could we go about it? All the same, our chances were
furnaces were stoked; the propeller churned the waves more swiftly;
hasn’t even started. Patience! We’re sure to end up bumping into some
with some new breed of pirates, exploiting the sea after their own
reviving the crew’s failing spirits. The ocean was observed with
lungs. Had we risen to the surface of the waves? Had we cleared the
Geography of the Sea.
province of Languedoc are said to like better than oysters, some of
the President, the Pacific, and the City of Glasgow, lost for reasons
showing my distaste for such a beverage. He assured me that this milk
today, in the name of my companions as well as myself, if you intend
mother-of-pearl, in other words, that blue, azure, violet, or white
feet long! I’ve even heard that those rorqual whales off the Aleutian
Little by little, the mists were dispersed under the action of the
don’t discount something with the feeble excuse that you’ve never
increasingly powerful aggressive weapons, it was possible that,
Captain Nemo went back on board. Conseil and I stayed behind until
and impressive way of navigating that did indeed recall the maneuvers
it. It was an albatross of the finest species, a wonderful specimen of
Content. The undertaking had ended happily, and in its first dispatch,
armored fortress are troubled by ants running over the armor plate.
more than equaled the one that the explorer Tavernier sold the Shah of
life. Hence they embody a sort of natural socialism. I was familiar
from their attacks!”
promising opportunities that Ned Land mentioned. To operate with such
drive away the dark, and in the midst of the murky waters, I wonder
documents. Given this, no one will be astonished at the uproar
me, twisted from convulsive movements, as if making a last effort to
at seven o’clock in the evening.
ever was one. With some justice, fishermen’s yarns aren’t to be
great animation into it. He complained vehemently about being
indigo, and blue; in short, the whole palette of a color-happy
destructive beasts, and they deserve to be exterminated.”
We stayed on the alert until daylight, getting ready for
when suddenly he saw me plunge my arms swiftly into the net, pull out
been given the name freshwater sponges. But their waters of choice are
“Well, Professor Aronnax,” Captain Nemo answered me, “we’re actually
long as he carries with him his own supply of breathable air. For
“Yet it strikes me that diving suits like yours could perform yeoman
Near four o’clock in the afternoon, unable to control the impatience
stationed beside me, stared straight ahead. Roosting in the shrouds,
holes gave off a sulfurous odor, showing that the inner fires still
afternoon, the Nautilus will float off and exit the Torres Strait
game, and if the types of game aren’t of such size that they can hunt
second Torre del Greco.
gallant lad by leaving out his personal observations.
eyes were still unable to catch a single one of those hazy gleams that
this was the arrangement: while one of us lay on his back, staying
Instantly there he was, thrown on his back, legs in the air, his body
defend their little ones, their fury is dreadful, and it isn’t rare
with his views. Couldn’t master persuade his friend Captain Nemo to
Be that as it may, Captain Nemo also introduced me to the different
follow the windings of the tunnel. In either case our forward motion
and ailing, set sail with the Count de La Pérouse. They headed to the
perched in the crosstrees, would cause intolerable anguish, and this
novel secret to you?”
Orinoco, Niger, Senegal, Elbe, Loire, and Rhine, which bring it waters
you’ll see what no human being has ever seen before—since my men and I
contained within the field of his lens. Then he lowered his spyglass
borne by the wind over some prairie on land; but it would be more
“Indeed,” the captain replied with a smile, “and in this respect, the
this inexhaustible fishing for silver and gold.
some 150 feet. So, unless this reef was subject to the intermittent
utmost accuracy.
“Infinitely rich, sir, and without any trouble, I could pay off the
My heart was pounding. Would we emerge into the open and find the
reputation.”
mackerel with wings made of filaments; bullheads forever spattered
still thirsting for the beast’s blood, finally pierced it to the
fisherman’s hut on one of the Lofoten Islands. My two companions, safe
darted between the fringes of two clouds. Then all traces of light
point, near Bubastis, and the Red Sea left it navigable only a few
“An acquired taste,” Ned Land replied.
“Fire and brimstone!” Ned put in.
“No, Ned! People don’t know so, they suppose so, and here’s the logic
of algae and fucus. What an indescribable sight, and what a variety of
We were miles apart. But before I could reply, he showed me a
fish sweeping by like shadows.
lengths from a strand crowned by superb piles of rocks. The skiff was
my life story, this manuscript will be enclosed in a small, unsinkable
eyes and let me proceed without making a single complaint.
I could easily have picked off this islander, he stood at such close
When I shared these impressions with him, he answered me in a tone
surf foamed against it. From beyond this ridge there came fearsome
gigantic animals undeniably exist, took place a few years ago in
So Conseil and I were deep in the contemplation of our treasure, and I
the suborder Eolidea that looked like small slugs, sea butterflies
“I know it, sir. So we can’t rely on nature to rescue us, only our own
afraid they would give themselves away.
us, we never suffered from the heat, because thirty or forty meters
your profits. Here, by contrast, I have only to pick up what other men
specimens of this zoophyte. This coral was the equal of those fished
drowsiness overcame us. Since I saw no good reason to resist the call
bulky footwear adorned with heavy lead soles. The fabric of the jacket
an invading sea had caught by surprise!
was the despairing yell given by this unfortunate man. Forgetting his
this time an expedition was at issue that could drag on indefinitely,
in his pockets, and turned his back on us.
charged, were placed on our backs, but the electric lamps were not in
articulates, mollusks, and fish.
have caused this urgent need for sleep, when I felt a dense torpor
crustaceans too frightful to contemplate, such as 100-meter lobsters
Then, chart in hand, we returned to the deeds of the French navigator:
blasts from rifles, but without much success because bullets and
been renewed four hours earlier, following daily practice on
emerged a meter above the waves. Quivering violently, its tail was
and the Sargasso Sea is the center of the whirl.”
single hour, in making for those seas where the animal had just been
and ferns.
volcano. So you have nothing to be sorry about.”
THE YEAR 1866 was marked by a bizarre development, an unexplained and
Katrin St. and halted at Pier 34. There the Katrin ferry transferred
History at least half a meter of its ivory lance!”
Antarctic regions.
navigate over tracts of ice, they’ll have to stop at the Ice Bank.
starvation because the Nautilus’s provisions will certainly last
Two days passed. The Abraham Lincoln stayed at half steam. On the
fish samples: dolphinfish with azure fins, gold tails, and flesh
thought his sole reason for leading us to this locality was to show us
I understood his fear. A gigantic shadow appeared above the poor
as for me, I was shivering all over. With whom were we dealing? Surely
Moreover, the moon then disappeared and left us in profound
This short dialogue reveals that in my mania for the Nautilus, I was
“Do the prices of these pearls differ depending on their size?”
inexhaustible is this series of underwater wonders! As it was, in the
“Why, Ned!” I replied. “You still aren’t over your old fishing urges?”
answered by a voice that was getting closer and closer. I could barely
Near one o’clock, Captain Nemo gave the signal to halt. Speaking for
“Perfectly, Mr. Land. It was catching its breath!”
were playing about in the tranquil waters, and I could easily see that
“Good lord,” the Canadian went on, “it’s rolled over on its back, and
sunlight. Would you like to see these depths on a dark night?”
perished in large numbers on its sandbanks and that no one risked
“Conseil!” I called in an impatient voice.
depths? What creatures inhabit, or could inhabit, those regions twelve
personal interests could be reconciled with that natural compassion to
latitude 47 degrees 24’ and longitude 17 degrees 28’, this ship sank
Nemo brought a real passion to them. I often wondered why he took
when they’re properly cooked, these winged creatures make a pleasant
the torpedo has led to this underwater battering ram, which in turn
“O ship of an accursed nation, you know who I am!” he shouted in his
everything happening here—except under certain rare circumstances—in
“If Captain Nemo does sometimes go ashore,” I told them, “at least he
siphonula coral, alcyon coral, sea anemone from the genus Caryophylia,
“They taste like chicken stuffed with truffles,” Conseil said.
morning I climbed onto the platform. The same phrase was pronounced by
least the nations allied against him knew they were no longer hunting
be extremely dangerous, and I wouldn’t have advised Ned Land to try
both!”
“Oh, professor!” shouted Ned Land, whose hunting fever had gone to his
easily exit by going either ahead or astern, sinking a few hundred
silver moonfish, worthy of their name, rose on the horizon of the
the shores of some lost ocean; still farther off, long rows of
remarkable were rays whose ultra slender tails made up nearly a third
simple arithmetic. Your life is worth more than ours. So we had to
type, I mean.
water.
shore, yet you own forests on Crespo Island?”
Canadian’s plans. I might add that I could hardly use our state of
The Pacific Ocean extends north to south between the two polar circles
Nevertheless, Conseil kept towing me. Sometimes he looked up, stared
“We’re going through!” Conseil muttered in my ear.
for trying again later on? I weighed all these considerations, turned
“Ye gods, just give me a good harpoon! You see, sir, these sharks are
actually a type of seaweed encrusted with limestone salts, which,
“We’re in longitude 137 degrees 15’ west of the meridian of Paris, and
alerted previously or he found the plan feasible, because he showed no
whirlpool. Hate swallows him whole.
staying as motionless as if these coral polyps had already walled it
“Quite so, Conseil, and what’s more, I imagine that people will soon
of the forest, and for two hours we explored it in every direction.
first in the field. In New York preparations were under way for an
“If we do not know every one of them, if nature still keeps
regulations, and I insist that you never invoke them in front of me!”
the plating of this machine. I searched its surface for an opening or
centigrade.
getting out of here!”
including spotted rays that were oval in shape and brick red in color,
fertile flood season. I also noticed some wrasse known as the tapiro,
It was the Dutch navigator Tasman who discovered this group in 1643,
in either the northern or southern hemispheres, and until proof to the
“Would you like,” Captain Nemo asked me, “to bring back more than just
gleaming panoplies of arms, adorned walls on which were stretched
IT WAS THE ship’s commander who had just spoken.
Sruick in 1753, by Tasman, Dampier, Fumel, Carteret, Edwards,
“But we fix things by kicking out all the jailers, guards, and
“But one proviso,” I said, “just one. The opportunity must be the real
requisite strength to eat coconuts; it scrambles up trees on the beach
As for the Nautilus, it seemed as tranquil and mysterious as ever. It
frigate gaining two fathoms on the cetacean. At this rate, it was
admit that I entertained no illusions. I had no faith in those
him—has just made us a very pleasant proposition!”
Finishing his investigations, Dillon stayed at the site of the
with acute anxiety, it entered the company docks.
of the horizon with the utmost care. Then, his examination over, he
d’Estaing, it assisted in the capture of the island of Grenada. On
pretty strong gust from the south. The sea was swelling and
down south? Would he double the Cape of Good Hope, then Cape Horn, and
We were thoroughly satisfied with the results of our hunting. A
result simply from mother-of-pearl solidifying into a globular
you’ll stay aboard my vessel. You’ll be free here, and in exchange for
“See!” he went on. “It’s waking up under the sun’s caresses! It’s
the spirit of the storm. A dreadful noise filled the air, a
“What about master’s live babirusa?”
“Whatever could that be, sir?” he replied sarcastically. “Have you
sails were on the horizon, no doubt ships going as far as Cape São
darkness deepened again, relieved only by little sparkles given off by
place. That’s all I have on me.”
research is a relief, a potent diversion, an enticement, a passion
I worked in my stateroom until noon without seeing Captain Nemo even
the beginning of the world, whales traveled even quicker.”
had thought incapable of weeping.
his electric device. His companion did likewise. Conseil and I
freezing?”
Two cable lengths off the Abraham Lincoln’s starboard quarter, the sea
“Well then, we’ll enter that Atlantic Ocean with which we aren’t yet
which were briskly plucked, hung from a spit, and roasted over a
about our little doings, if you please, but in such a way that nobody
unreachable regions? Perhaps. But he didn’t say. He stood still,
monsters, the human imagination always tends to run wild. People not
“I don’t, Professor Aronnax; the Nautilus returns to me.”
I replied in clear French that I wasn’t familiar with his language;
risked his whole fortune to promote this undertaking, called for a new
“Yes, sir! The Avenger! A splendid name!” Captain Nemo murmured,
waterways off the Norwegian coast? Was the Nautilus being dragged into
am I chained to this hunk of sheet iron!”
DURING THE PERIOD in which these developments were occurring, I had
temples. One of these elders related the history of another town 1,000
mutiny on board, but after a reasonable period of intransigence,
and he did so with grace and alacrity, not even exacting my promise to
of these man-eaters.
Antipodes.
these different specimens, and I was wondering what financial
Suddenly daylight appeared in the lounge. The sheet-iron panels slid
ships under the Count de La Pérouse.
bullhead, a species of whitish cartilaginous fish overrun with bluish
expert on the subject, Commander Maury, author of The Physical
“Sir,” he told me that day, “it’s got to stop. I want to get to the
This logic, backed up by figures, left me without a single objection.
Captain Nemo pointed to this prodigious heap of shellfish, and I saw
themselves at home, light a fire—”
end, which led into the library.
ships like the Scotia or the Abraham Lincoln. Consequently, the feats
passed between the Tonga Islands, where crews from the Argo,
left to the fury of the elements.
drew noticeably closer to the surface of the sea, and soon, walking in
I dared not hesitate, even if Captain Nemo stood before me. I opened
olden times, fine fabrics, stockings, and gloves were made from such
island will be fused to its neighboring island groups, and a fifth
perhaps advisable.
This said, the Canadian withdrew, leaving me close to dumbfounded. I
of either hot or cold.
unknown creature, how should we defend ourselves against it? Let’s
conserving my machinery. Accordingly, when I have a mind to visit the
treasure, displaying them with the helter-skelter picturesqueness that
the island’s rivers and are the subjects of special veneration. They
cave-ins, and great iceberg somersaults would occur all around us,
from humanity. Your coming has disrupted my whole existence.”
bonito from the genus Scomber decked out in the colors blue and
“But if master says so,” Conseil told him, “then so be it.”
to dig a hole.
Tortured by the growling of his well-built stomach, Ned Land was
slithered some sea elephants, a type of seal with a short, flexible
the horizon.
words interrupted me:
captain’s chief reading. There I saw the complete works of Humboldt,
didn’t want to restrict my companions’ freedom in any way, and yet I
of incalculable worth that had been oozed by the rarest of
plus the bulkheads and interior braces, have a combined weight of
“Ned, Ned! Don’t say that!” Conseil answered. “You a cannibal? Why,
touched with emotion:
which would only make our situation worse.”
Nautilus wasn’t going to strike the double-decker where it was clad in
for big ships.
observe the orb sinking little by little along a very extended
crust of whitened seashells, as if under a mantle of snow. Carefully
an unexpected apparition.
no structural deformities to worry about, because the double hull of
Now in open water, the Nautilus took a direct course to the pole
Nautilus’s fishermen had some trouble getting a grip on this animal,
half-suffocated victim, and I had gone to join in the rescue, when I
nothing remains but the fibers, either gelatinous or made of horn,
“Just this. In 1861, to the northeast of Tenerife and fairly near the
glorious mission but also a dangerous one! We don’t know where it will
into squat spirals, and finally a thousand samples of a polypary I
the shoulder bone, an order that’s divided into five families and
I didn’t pronounce a word. I gaped. Captain Nemo took out the ingots
“Honestly, sir,” he told me. “You and your Captain Nemo, I pity you
leaving him I couldn’t be accused of ingratitude. No solemn promises
good will.”
“It’s a Chinese triggerfish,” Ned Land replied.
reply told me nothing.
its port paddle wheel.
And in all honesty, I confess that this venturesome excursion was far
process lasting only thirty seconds.
shore, perhaps a continent whose limits we couldn’t see. The existence
“Positively, sir.”
their lower parts leading to huge couches upholstered in maroon
that a piece of coral broke off in the collision and plugged the very
completely wiped out these beneficial races? Rotting weeds have
“That’s not important,” the captain replied evasively. “The Nautilus
him.
of the waves! Numerous underwater volcanoes have been sighted in this
Indeed, it was essential to beat a retreat because some twenty
under the Count de La Pérouse had miscarried. I straightened suddenly.
order to double-check these different soundings. I got ready to record
frightfully.
these Union coasts.
We were walking on sand that was fine-grained and smooth, not wrinkled
us to get tired of these beautiful things.
saw that it swelled at certain points from low bulges that were
the passion in his gestures transfigured him. Yes, he loved his ship
“Maybe that’s why Kate Tender married somebody else,” replied Mr. Land
Spain, Italy, America, and even Turkey, the hypothesis of an
encountered. One unusual detail: his eyes were spaced a little far
leaves and long red twigs were gracefully trailing. They swam with
enough to fill two or three casks.
Association, the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C., at
belonged to different nationalities, although indications of European
“I think as master does,” Conseil replied, “and it’s extremely
then I collapsed. . . .
their tails and tossed them back into the sea. A few months later off
simply a turn of the head inside the sphere. Placed on our backs, the
die . . .
Leaning against the walls, I dragged myself down the gangways to the
father watching over his family, the mother suckling her little ones,
and dried, still kept their wonderful colors. Among these valuable
progress; then the needle stopped.
This struck me as a pretty needless question, to say the least.
Just then the dugout canoes drew nearer to the Nautilus, and a cloud
form a vortex from which no ship has ever been able to
in structure have led my famous mentor Professor Milne-Edwards to
This diver didn’t see us. A shadow cast by our crag hid us from his
grip? Even so, Captain Nemo rushed at the devilfish and with a sweep
obviously were true Papuans, men of fine stock, athletic in build,
behind us, collapsing in enormous sections with the hollow rumble of
audible. You could tell that some panels were shifting over the
water sprang from its blowholes and rose to an altitude of forty
the latter rushed at him, the captain leaped aside with prodigious
appearance.
the days of the ancients, if I’m not mistaken, it had an abominable
cluttered with such gruesome wreckage as the Nautilus drew nearer to
couldn’t mistake their little ways.”
“I don’t have to tell you, sir,” Ned Land replied, “that the Red Sea
easterly coast.
CHAPTER 18
pole.
and ringdove were devoured to the bones and declared
the ship’s plating, was likewise carried around at dizzying speed. I
reaches, located 4,431 meters down, and even there it rested without
bolts would be much less frightening, although the danger lies in the
breathable air, it at least operates the powerful pumps that store it
is a life without joy.”
eyes, they were fantastically carved rocks, forests of trees that had
with white bellies and black coats, known by the name monk seals and
“Sir, I’m going to sink it.”
gather on that beach, the Nautilus would still have nothing to fear
muttered.
it heads toward Spitzbergen. But before entering the Gulf of Mexico
Conseil, and I were on board. It was ten o’clock in the morning. I
then fell asleep.
of the ocean. And the passing years will someday bear out Maury’s
“I’d like to believe you, captain,” I went on in a tone of some
no roots and didn’t care which solid objects secured them, sand,
Because Newfoundland is simply an underwater peak, you could call
But this circumstance had been foreseen, because I felt myself
than satisfactory method in the midst of these winding passageways
that forbids their moving about. In this respect oysters are inferior
ready in its impenetrable depths. There the last sleep of the
The sea is of no great depth at the Grand Banks. A few hundred fathoms
“Ahhh!” Conseil was putting in. “What fine oxygen! Let master have no
“A company chartered by the Spanish government to search for these
via the Atlantic Cable! Accordingly, the wags claimed that this
this excellent animal has been hunted so bloodthirstily that, like its
up. Then he strode right toward the monster, dagger in hand, ready to
the stempost. Total: a length of 35 meters. Doors were cut into the
Botanical Gardens, the boy had come to know a thing or two. In Conseil
behind forever. I wanted to plunge my eyes through the lounge window
you’d starve to death rather than complain!”
“Easy, professor, no cause for alarm.”
ate very little. Conseil, everlastingly prudent, “force-fed” himself;
“Tell me, Ned,” I asked, “can you make out the nationality of that
plates shaped like old Homer’s lyre, swallowfish swimming as fast as
Captain Nemo.”
Nemo to take us into this gulf. But I wholeheartedly approved of the
approaching some natural phenomenon still unknown to scientists on
iron, silver, and gold whose mining would quite certainly be
insure working in the best direction. Long bores were driven into the
surprised to see some of those monsters hereabouts.”
were black on top, underneath a pinkish white strewn with small, very
some brook lamprey, a type of eel fifteen inches long, head greenish,
matter, and huge chunks were loosened from its mass. These chunks
rise again. At the poles you’ll see the consequences of this
was the effort to pick it up.”
They climbed onto the platform. Conseil, whom nothing could startle,
into a sea.
“625!” Ned repeated.
“We’ll do it this evening at nine o’clock,” he said. “I’ve alerted
purged of this fearsome cetacean.
from between the plates of a hydraulic press!”
In an hour we had reached the islet. Two hours later we had completed
returning beneath the arches of the forest, through the thickets,
“A floating lighthouse,” said someone next to me.
the frigate—then doing fourteen knots—and wrapped us in sheets of
fruit eight months out of the year.
our favor, between ten and eleven this evening we’ll be landing on
tighten the narrative and accelerate its momentum.
pastimes. When your peers, Mr. Land, destroy decent, harmless
must have been!”
me, ‘A chance to escape is available to us,’ then I’ll discuss it with
and making them spurt to great heights. Under these conditions, who
of mermaid’s cups whose stems grew wider at the top, and a number of
“Salts,” he said, “fill the sea in considerable quantities, professor,
through those foaming eddies that a bay’s currents and countercurrents
mistreated the castaways; and in truth, the natives seemed afraid that
moving across it—isn’t it a pressure gauge?”
Battle of Chesapeake Bay. In 1794 the new Republic of France changed
“Near the island of Santorini, professor,” the captain answered me,
I didn’t reply, and while staring at these suspicious waves, I began
cylinder from end to end is exactly seventy meters, and its maximum
myself have just been taught by the Englishman H. C. Sirr!”
the stony mass, the outlines of incomparable distinctness whose far
in the sea?
turns, I noticed that the southerly horizon was blocked by a high wall
from the Americans, who when they do laugh, laugh raucously. I had
its two funnels. Its furled sails merged with the lines of its
distance. However, seeing that it stayed motionless, they regained
. . .”
For several days our work hours were spent in all sorts of
He gave an order. The Nautilus tacked about and retreated from this
the thermometer gave only -4 degrees.
duck gun with exploding bullets. On the forecastle was mounted the
and we’ve only to depart.”
During this whole time of low tide, the islanders lurked near the
sink just a few meters beneath the waves.
ON JANUARY 28, in latitude 9 degrees 4’ north, when the Nautilus
flabellarian coral, polyps flattened into stylish shapes and unique to
from a single giant clam. The delicately festooned rim of this shell,
Nautilus, but they weren’t boisterous. I often heard them repeat the
still eluded me?
weight from 1,507.2 metric tons to 1,513.77. So the added weight would
“I admit, captain, I’m not yet on very familiar terms with that genus
“How time flies on solid ground!” exclaimed Mr. Ned Land with a sigh
Nautilus’s pumps have prodigious strength, as you must have noticed
something else entirely, which, despite everything that has been
zigzags. Fish rose in a body at our feet like birds startled in tall
meters and a width at its base of forty-eight centimeters!
etc., plus the transactions of France’s Academy of Sciences, bulletins
stateroom. He was in the same lounge I had to cross in order to
just had to show off. So he told the harpooner:
The South Pole
this part of the ocean.
paradise prefers to inhabit. At other times they capture it with a
and were back on board. Just then the crewmen finished loading the
master get bitten?”
them than for the thousands of unfortunate people who would have
graciousness toward me. Then I saw no more of him for some days and
I hadn’t seen Captain Nemo for over a week, when, on the morning of
All these wonders I glimpsed in the space of a quarter of a mile,
that in the Red Sea and the Mediterranean there exist a number of
genus Nereocystis that bloomed to a height of fifteen meters, bouquets
real chagrin. He walked up and down, sat and stood, picked up a book
Verne is often dubbed, in Isaac Asimov’s phrase, “the world’s first
within a harpoon length, I’ll harpoon the brute.”
“One last question,” I said, just as this inexplicable being seemed
to this day—approached the cannon, put it in position, and took aim
had stood fast. Since we were no longer vertical, the starboard
and it would be squashed as flat as a piece of sheet iron.”
published in the issue of April 30.
under the waters. Words are powerless to describe such wonders! When
alone. But please understand that the Abraham Lincoln chased you over
remained content with inviting me to follow him, and I did so like a
were busy forming.
This chase dragged on for about three-quarters of an hour without the
that bathed his deathbed. I looked at his intelligent head, furrowed
Nemo. The panels in the lounge didn’t open. Perhaps they didn’t want
that dote on marine plants and crustaceans find plenty to eat. The
I’m afraid to entertain a single doubt. However, though I have no
the cave, and we climbed back up the bank of shellfish in the midst of
At noon the sun made a momentary appearance. Taking advantage of this
“Ned Land’s thoughts are exactly the opposite of mine,” Conseil
cleared, and on that day I hoped our noon sights could be
It occurred to me, lord knows why, that this boat buried under the sea
feet. That gave us 4,000 feet of ice overhead, of which 1,000 feet
pairs along their gill arches. This order includes only one
“Ned my friend, you’re a slayer of fish, a highly skilled
reduced to helplessness. It was unable to fly. It was barely able to
cetacean question no doubts arose in his mind, and he didn’t allow the
a moving object through the bushes. A shot went off, I heard a faint
“So, my poor Ned, I can only counsel patience.”
my forecasts, much to the Canadian’s despair. Did Captain Nemo view us
Near the middle of the platform, the skiff was half set in the ship’s
Ptolemies and the Roman emperors, it was a great commercial artery for
portrait, a monk by Velazquez, a martyr by Ribera, a village fair by
the bottom of his dinghy, moored a few feet above his head. He would
and our eyes never tired of probing the mysteries of the underwater
Meanwhile Captain Nemo studied the herd of cetaceans, then addressed
“Let’s go, let’s go!” I exclaimed.
believes that these underwater depths are lit up by phosphorescent
this little stroll.”
in gold for it.
Marseilles tuna nets and perish by the thousands.
and judging by your narwhale’s personality, it hates growing moldy
“Civilization!” Ned Land told me that day. “Much better than those
morning, a deafening hiss became audible, resembling the sound made by
keep a close watch on the Canadian’s movements and activities.
were like so many fiery diamonds, their brilliance more than any eye
reasons why Christopher Columbus assumed the existence of a New
just as solemn as if they were three-meter Dominicans.
board, always calm, unflinching, and uncomplaining.
Count de La Pérouse.
open air.
from the undersides of vessels that narwhales have pierced clean
the afterdeck, it disappeared beneath the waves to shouts of ‘Long
Aronnax, his manservant Conseil, and Mr. Ned Land, harpooner.
didn’t think so, because every previous attempt to reach this spot on
wrinkled heads; myriads of leaping blennies with black stripes and
readiness. I commented on this to the captain.
“Certainly,” he replied, “since the ballast tanks aren’t yet empty,
encounter seemed so minor that nobody on board would have been
“None, sir,” the stranger replied.
shoulder, and we took to the trail again.
imagination melted into hazy drowsiness, and I soon fell into an
definite connection between this sick crewman and yesterday’s
zoophytes, which were saturated with grease from organic matter
departure from Captain Nemo?”
Nemo stared at them for a few moments, stretched out his arms to them,
lifts swiftly into the skies.”
the Nautilus is no butcher knife.”
could cost us dearly. And in all honesty, I think we’re looking at
up. “And if you’d care to follow me, we’ll inspect the Nautilus’s
The farther down south we went, the more these floating islands grew
with spiral shells, gray nudibranchs from the genus Tethys that were
our first underwater excursion—came up to clean the glass panes of the
of regret.
Magellan, abreast of Cabo de las Virgenes. But Commander Farragut was
will peacefully lift it off, and it will resume its navigating through
Mr. Darwin observed, to which nature has given the instinct and
“And is Conseil going to risk it?” Ned asked.
health as an argument. Except for that grueling ordeal under the Ice
“If master will allow me to finish, I mean that if this phenomenon
enable me to store air under considerable pressure, and given this
“In the very heart of an extinct volcano,” the captain answered me, “a
course continued for fifteen or twenty days, and I’m not sure how long
There, a mile and a half from the frigate, a long blackish body
wink.
saw the daring captain clinging to one of the animal’s fins, fighting
“I came to ask master that,” Conseil replied.
be in sole charge of piloting the longboat. Besides, the shore lay no
then, this hole didn’t make itself, and since it hadn’t resulted from
harpoons crossed its soft flesh as if it were semiliquid jelly. After
“How so, Ned?”
that the Nautilus hadn’t changed direction. I could hear the beat of
fisherman, the Englishman Weddell, went as far as latitude 72 degrees
For the time being, Ned Land was content to chop these trunks into
smoking room.”
“Yes, sir. Just this. It’s possible that certain unforeseen events may
return to the Pacific South Seas.
for the sea. First as a Paris stockbroker, later as a celebrated
such men are rare, and when the poor fellows climb back on board, the
“Then see it we must, Conseil.”
when Ned Land and Conseil appeared in the lounge doorway.
depths of these seas that I’ve crossed so often, and you can be my
Meropis mentioned by the historian Theopompus; Plato’s Atlantis; the
dreams, I thought I heard a distant moaning, like a funeral dirge. Was
It was a squid of colossal dimensions, fully eight meters long. It was
underwater work projects, the workman wears a waterproof suit with his
“We’re yours to command, captain.”
went to sleep just as we did, and there it is, waking up after a
vertically. Its tongue, also of horn substance and armed with several
Questioning the natives, Captain Dumont d’Urville also learned that
chagrin to crush underfoot the gleaming mollusk samples that littered
nothing?”
of several leagues.”
pretty complicated instruments whose findings are dubious to say the
checks, these clusters of shellfish would have ended up jam-packing
them, rays were undulating like sheets flapping in the wind, and among
him. Just as we were boarding, he spotted several trees twenty-five to
better built for fighting than their harmless adversaries, but also
rushing with a sound of thunder, then its double rows of cannons and
when he saw that the convoy’s wealth was about to fall into enemy
I’d like nothing better than to believe in your captain’s little
sun’s altitude. I climbed onto the platform, lit a cigar, and watched
“No,” I said, “devilfish of large dimensions. But friend Land is no
and uniform temperature kept illness at bay; and for a man who didn’t
“My harpoon! Get my harpoon!” Ned Land exclaimed.
it’s raising its breasts in the air!”
hull and corresponding to a comparable hole cut into the side of the
own thoughts. For my part, despite the harpooner’s confident talk, I
nil. Helped by the water, my movements were executed with startling
“No, sir,” Ned Land replied, “because that beast won’t be caught
In less than twenty minutes, swept along by the torrent, the Nautilus
That day, March 14, he and Conseil managed to find me in my
Chassepot: it slays insects by shooting them with a simple drop of
“Yes, Conseil.”
“If master says so, then so be it,” Conseil answered. “But in all
Greeks now call Karpathos, Italians Scarpanto. Through the lounge
slacking off, it was almost full tide. The Nautilus drew near this
beyond human reach, but where progress will someday make great
sixty-third genus of bony fish. These were tuna from the genus
per hour to break on the beaches of America.
At 4:17 in the afternoon, during a high tea for passengers gathered in
calculations of naturalists, one of these animals only six feet long
nautilus, which is tentaculiferous (a bearer of tentacles), it will be
“you haven’t figured out what people do when they can’t escape from
islands, it was no longer feasible to jump ship. Nor did we have any
“I’m all for gingerbread,” I said, “but let’s resume this fascinating
ended in that moving scene at the coral cemetery, which left a
the Red Sea. What’s certain is that in 615 B.C. King Necho II was hard
hardly mattered so long as the lower surface kept growing thinner.
“A difficult undertaking.”
The sea was clearly visible for a one-mile radius around the
Conseil say?
outflow is so considerable, it desalts the sea over an area of several
companionway, and going along the upper gangway, I arrived at the
classes: mammals, reptiles, and those countless legions of fish, an
As discovered by Commander Maury, the true source of the Gulf Stream,
Meanwhile that monstrous herd kept coming closer. It had seen the
It was on this oceanic river that the Nautilus was then
repeat: having no gunpowder, I’ve replaced it with air at high
stocking the larder with excellent red meat, even better than beef or
sheet-iron cetacean and mortally wound it.
In the northeast there emerged two volcanic islands of unequal size,
rays light up the sea for a distance of half a mile.”
ocean: a small cylindrical trunk adorned with vertical lines, mottled
“And why not, Conseil?”
procedures, we set foot on the floor of the Atlantic, 300 meters down.
“Precisely,” I replied.
I approached this phenomenal mollusk. Its mass of filaments attached
animal came in the nick of time for us to bag some real quadruped
entrust the polyps with sealing away our dead for eternity!”
islands, whose neighborhoods the animal always seemed to avoid—“No
“Boiling water!” he muttered.
novel features a tour of the major oceans, and the term Leagues in its
against a base of red and brown; an imperial spiny oyster, brightly
“Captain,” I replied, “I’ll rest content with marveling. You’ve
armor divided into eight lengthwise sections.
marked by the exploits of Ned and Conseil.
many ribald figures of speech for soapbox orators in the Greek
reef, against which the ever-surging sea broke with the fearsome
spotted this island’s lofty summits a few miles to leeward. Its waters
by means of force pumps and flow regulators.”
little man was certainly a living proof of this claim. You could sense
“Kindly follow me.”
pilothouse, and unless I’m extremely mistaken, Captain Nemo must have
but I was reassured to observe the captain lying motionless beside me.
them. Ned, as usual, kept looking for changes of pace from our
pirates think they’re going to smother me in this cage without hearing
“I was right to claim that baleen whales have enough natural enemies
magnificent rocks, these uninhabited caves, these last global haunts
its propeller, churning the waves with steady speed. Staying on the
classified shirts and suits as expertly as birds and mammals.
He went down the hatch. Had he seen that vessel change course and
Madrepores, which one must guard against confusing with precious
“Ye gods,” the Canadian shot back, “I’m starting to appreciate the
salps have ever given off such a powerful light. That glow is
because “he’s too big for it!”
minutes we would be on board, and there I could breathe easy
Then, following the captain’s example, I let myself be crowned with my
earned me this comparatively charitable welcome from Captain
Canadian, who that day asked me where we were going.
America alone, 5,000 ships manned by 75,000 seamen go after cod. Each
actual underwater forests.”
hide from the sight of those ships of every nation that plowed the
flutes and just begging for a puff from the god Pan, shells unique to
waters rivaled the electric glow of our beacon, especially in the
sweepers, snappers, and squirrelfish; underneath this coral covering I
marked by a large black spot encircled in white and resembling an eye,
he have built it in secret?
comparable surprises in store for me? I felt sure it did, so
Atlantic, and 2,500 meters in the Mediterranean. The most remarkable
of his remarks. Ned saw with pleasure that this course would bring us,
about with such prodigious speed?
sporting a grayish tint, huge mirrors that reflected the sparse rays
emeralds, whose jets of blue and green crisscrossed. Here and there,
down the steps.
heart.
Japanese salamanders, serpentine moray eels from the genus Echidna
under the conditions in which we’re placed.”
me to pinpoint the date precisely; but I had plenty of time to look
In this way we caught several loggerheads, reptiles a meter wide and
me:
varieties of these titanic species, for whom years are centuries and
“That, sir, is being done right now. You can hear the pumps
Did this hate also hunger for vengeance? Time would soon tell.
tackle. But I can also move the Nautilus upward and downward on a
“I believe it. Master is reading his own book!”
It brought tears to my eyes to hear him say these words.
helmet shells, angel-wing conchs, sea hares, and so many other
couldn’t make up my mind.
ease.
togetherness.
whale, some of them alighted on it and prodded its resonant sheet iron
Sailors rushed to the helm, engineers to their machinery. Under
an individual existence while also participating in a communal
billowy. The wind was blowing a strong gust from the east. The
from its icy bed by a change in its specific gravity. When it was
and longitude 139 degrees 32’ west, I spotted Martin Point on Nuku
“Sexto and last,” Conseil said, “the plectognaths, whose maxillary
enormous thing” at sea, a long spindle-shaped object, sometimes giving
not appear. Which amounted to forgetting our castaway status for much
Nemo, and he launched his ship against the ice fields with hideous
would observe the cetacean’s movements. I stared; I stared until I
“Listen to me, Ned—”
steward staggered out at a signal from his superior; but such was the
and during his stroll through this forest, he gathered with sure hands
a fearsome pair of sharks. They were blue sharks, dreadful man-eaters
I was marveling at this magnificent ocean view when Captain Nemo
have lost, and not only in this Bay of Vigo but at a thousand other
“It’s a siren!” Conseil exclaimed. “With all due respect to master,
Soon, in the shadows, I spotted a pale signal light glimmering a mile
Professor Milne-Edwards, who puts the decapods in three divisions:
but she married somebody else instead. Well, that necklace cost me
month too soon.
We cut the Equator. Twenty miles to the west lay Guiana, French
“Well, captain, what the ancients hesitated to undertake, Mr. de
By then the Nautilus had reduced speed. It moved ahead at a saunter,
So I sampled away, more as a curiosity seeker than an epicure, while
launched to an altitude of six meters. But next to the professor’s
the platform. Captain Nemo hadn’t left it. He stood in the bow next to
Captain Nemo ever ventures into European seas.”
incidentally, that a number of saltwater fish can make with ease. I’ll
solely with whalebone, the sperm whale is equipped with twenty-five
“As little as zero! It comes from the scales of a European carp, it’s
being crushed or asphyxiated.”
glass panel, “here come a couple of your varieties now!”
latter’s encounter with the Abraham Lincoln, when the Canadian hit it
Unshaken by these squalls, Captain Nemo stationed himself on the
“Fine, Ned,” I said, then resurrected one of the Canadian’s
of the equinox; the sun would disappear below the horizon for six
Why were we imprisoned behind these masks of metal and glass! Why were
“An indisputable event, my gallant Ned. Accordingly, people have
Near 5:30 the first glimmers of light on the horizon defined the upper
climb up. This was the underpinning of Crespo Island. This was land.
The Canadian paused in his work. But one word twenty times repeated,
horizon. The waves were dyed red over an area of several miles, and
All at once the Nautilus stopped. A jolt made it tremble through its
“Professor,” the commander replied swiftly, “I’m not what you term a
anyhow! And that’s all of ’em?”
ichthyological secrets from us, nothing is more admissible than to
“Professor,” Captain Nemo replied, “static objects mustn’t be confused
belonged to the Peninsular & Oriental line, which provides service
bailiwick!”
exhaustion. My limbs stiffened in the grip of intense cramps. Conseil
“Calm yourself, Ned my friend,” Conseil replied serenely. “Don’t flare
“Sure,” Ned Land went on, “but it remains to be seen whether we’ll
meters high. We arrived there on May 28, and the Nautilus lay no
his eyes would flicker with dark fire, and I was in constant dread
seahorses common to every ocean; flying dragonfish with long snouts
assumed extremely graceful positions. Consequently, their gentle
for the animal in question among those marine creatures already
his way.
moves. It crosses oceans like swallows cross the air or express trains
masses, those puny works of man! No, the civilized world won’t be good
They were sago palms, vegetation that grows without being cultivated;
matter what happens, one of us will be pleased. So, in conclusion, I
10. The Underwater Coalfields
these animals grow back through regeneration, and in seven years the
“No, at least not this time, because I’m eager to continue our
secret. Now then, if the crew of this underwater boat have a personal
stateroom, full of wonder at this startling excursion on the bottom of
force me to confine you to your cabins for some hours, or even for
hauled in volcanic ash hurled above the waves. As far as the equator
of limbs, the head squat, the hair black and luxuriant, the mustache
“You may talk freely,” the captain told me. “This man doesn’t
I asked him what he had seen or heard on his part.
went below to my stateroom. There I found my supper ready. I ate and
through the windows I saw, for a half-mile radius, the sea brightly
light vanish.
secret were to die with its inventor!”
misanthropy that kept Captain Nemo and his companions sequestered
within a gutta-percha covering, which was protected by a padding of
Conseil that sponges are fished up in two ways, either by dragnet or
the oval-shaped Auricula myosotis, tan wentletrap snails, common
long-skulled predators. At first the latter showed little concern at
Captain Nemo was there. Mute, gloomy, implacable, he was staring
the sky and left only a few stars in view. My eyes flew to the side
The water struck me as unusually cold, but I warmed up promptly while
“Here, no,” Ned Land said. “But elsewhere. . . .”
as Captain Nemo had promised.
unseen by their own scientific eyes.
of myrtle, framed by rugged mountains, saturated with clean,
remains a dark secret. In all, the novel had a difficult
sun’s altitude tomorrow, I won’t be able to try again for another six
“Explain yourself, Ned.”
depending on whether it’s clear or veiled in vapor, “predicts fair
polar night would begin. Following the September equinox, the sun had
Commander Farragut wanted nothing more than to go forth.
It took pulleys of great strength to hoist this dugong onto the
and evasion, refused to guide them to the site of the casualty. This
Brachyura: long-legged spider crabs, violet crabs, and sponge crabs
pearls.”
“Yes, my boy, it’s a left-handed shell!”
of its keel had been smashed.
Paris. However, I feel compelled to mention that bread and wine were
I bowed in agreement. The commander hadn’t put a question to me. So no
one gulp. The open waters at the shoreline were alive with these
While grazing these rocky slopes lost under the waters, I still
range; but I thought it best to wait for an actual show of
of fan mussel fabric. A perplexing circumstance because we weren’t in
familiar with the differences between bony fish and cartilaginous
We had been left to ourselves for twenty minutes, trying to detect the
credence to these reports, which had been carried in some of the less
“How true!”
appeared. But when the first islander laid hands on the companionway
disappears when the polyp dies, emitting ammonia as it rots. Finally
with us!”
followed their normal sequence. I felt myself being drawn into that
Sea’s dreadful storms nor its currents and reefs.”
seals. True, it was a killer whale, belonging to the biggest known
off,” Conseil added. “That’s why I propose that we return to the
keep track of every day and every hour.”
inside!”
separating us from open water—and he decided to crush this layer. The
situation? Would my returning to this subject arouse suspicions that
dissolving mass, taking on the color of wine dregs. Both contusion and
it, to talk it over. My stubborn companion hadn’t granted me this
We gasped. More stunned than afraid, we stood mute and motionless. The
into the skiff, pushing it to sea, and positioning its two oars were
Rubens, two Flemish landscapes by Teniers, three little genre
caused the ship to be compared appropriately to a long cigar. I noted
1867. Made in America, this valuable instrument could fire a
pearl oysters reproduce by the millions. These valuable mollusks stick
THE FOLLOWING DAY, January 10, the Nautilus resumed its travels in
Cook gave its current name in 1773. This group is chiefly made up of
My eyes flew back to the pressure gauge. The instrument indicated a
“It isn’t an issue,” I said, “of fishing for them with a swivel hook,
courteously, and paid remarkable attention. But nothing in his facial
Ned Land was about forty years old. A man of great height—over six
aground. The first ship was destroyed almost immediately. The second,
accept the existence of fish or cetaceans of new species or even new
failed.
glimpse these animals alive and at large in their native element.
was he immersed in his trance.
the bottom lay no more than a meter down, and this locality was one of
happenings, and the mystery of those events concerned me at least as
that.”
“Ned my friend,” I told him, “I know how you feel, but you mustn’t
much as 120 metric tons of oil.”
wretchedly in a train wreck! If that energetic man was able to think
superhuman proportions. He was no longer my equal, he was the Man of
are needed to weigh one milligram, their role is no less
As he was saying these words, the door opened. A steward entered.* He
I was observing the state of the sea under these conditions, and even
but what a barrier still lay between us and the surface of the ocean!
limbs. Like little domes of lead, my lids fell over my eyes. I
One was short and stocky, powerfully muscled, broad shouldered, robust
cataclysms? Who had set up these rocks and stones like the dolmens of
individual.
tracks. It was eleven o’clock, and if Captain Nemo found conditions
exclaimed.
Nautilus’s interior. Accordingly, that day it kept getting worse.
named after the Astrolabe, and just two months after Dillon had left
“Well, sir?” Ned Land went on, seeing that I hadn’t replied.
pectoral fins are attached by fleshy extensions that make these fish
lay himself open to—”
centimeters long, which a baleen whale can swallow by the thousands in
moving in, eyes ablaze, drawn by the lure of human flesh!
fluttering like a thin ribbon.
I kept on working, but the temperature rose to the point of becoming
to the point where their evaporation exactly equals the amounts of
to this expedition by the French government. After spending six months
gardens and flowerbeds in the ocean’s lower strata.
listened. What’s your reply?”
my eyes eagerly scanned the horizon.
imprisons the operator’s nose and mouth; one hose is for the entrance
which is nil in the High Arctic regions and very active in equatorial
father, and mother! There lies everything I hate! Not another word out
shivered all over.
Just for the record, I’ll mention those Mediterranean fish that
Most of these seals were sleeping on the rocks or the sand. Among
hypotheses seemed extremely plausible to me, and to hope for freedom
profession of wit, spilling waves of ink and some of them even two or
palm-tree ropes, caulked with powdered resin, and coated with dogfish
peaceful sleep.
gullets of porpoises and seals. I noted some one-decimeter southern
Much to my surprise, Captain Nemo gave me the permission I asked for,
mark at Brest Arsenal around 1785. There could no longer be any doubt.
Atlantic basin.
Atlantic, its waters never mixing with the ocean’s waters. It’s a
clutches? Is Captain Nemo alive? Is he still under the ocean pursuing
armed with ten teeth in each jaw: four incisors in both the upper and
I was about to go below to alert them, when the chief officer climbed
look at the dense Ice Bank we were going to conquer. The weather was
I sampled it and agreed. So this milk was a worthwhile reserve ration
electrocute, it’s surely the most dreadful animal ever conceived by
place in the bowels of the sea.
miles to leeward of the coast of Patagonia. We had crossed the Tropic
submersible carved out a channel for itself. Carried away by its
“We’ll say coal from the seafloor, if you prefer,” Captain Nemo
different masses of ice, which are classified by size and shape with a
forehead in one of his standard gestures, closed his eyes as if to
longitude 50 degrees 72’ and 69 degrees east.
Secretary of the Navy, I understood at last that my true vocation, my
streaks with blue and yellow fins plus gold and silver scales, snooks,
tiniest objects remained visible. After ten minutes of walking, we
This measure was distasteful to me. To my mind it would lead
“It’s marvelous,” I replied, “and I truly see, captain, how right you
southwesterly, and in three days it had cleared the 750 leagues that
opportunity?”
the genus Caryophylia with translucent tentacles, plus anemone with
Mediterranean. Finally, among the Anomura, he saw common drocina crabs
“You’re up to maximum pressure?” the commander asked him.
these trouble spots so prominent in the statistics: Cape Race,
A gentle slope gravitated to an uneven bottom whose depth was about
Nautilus was built to rest on the ocean floor, and I don’t need to
at work on a canal that was fed by Nile water and ran through the
denser than air, you’d have to overcome considerable resistance.”
fire-belching mountains may reappear above the surface of the
“Finally, we’re upright!” I exclaimed.
So I begged Ned to let me think about it before taking action. If this
again ringed the edges of various objects with the entire color
it’s an actual chain that fetters him to the shore, and if we were to
*Author’s Note: About 106 meters. An English foot is only 30.4
reasonable clarity the overall effect of its buildings, the ships made
delicately painted designs.
field—it was an endless, immovable barrier formed by ice mountains
“Two o’clock at least,” Conseil replied.
under these strangest of auspices.
the Marquesas Islands.
Five days passed in this way with no change in our situation. Every
political revolutions? I couldn’t say yet. As for me, whom fate had
“You’re rich, then?”
major role in my dreams. And I found it more or less appropriate that
reaches of the Nautilus. I open some stopcocks, the tanks fill, the
stared at the captain. His face had resumed its usual
genus Spirorbis, and certain starfish specimens.
as far as the 69th parallel on the 100th meridian. In 1839 the
136 degrees 42’ east. The shores of Japan were less than 200 miles to
During this navigating in the midst of the ice, Captain Nemo often
By 8:30 we were back on board the Nautilus.
“Are these animals dangerous?” Conseil asked me.
those in a lighthouse and kept its rays productively focused. This
Around this basin, inside elegant glass cases fastened with copper
our enthusiasm was near the boiling point. But the Canadian didn’t
at the whim of the mists. Some of these masses displayed green veins,
Dr. Robert D. Ballard, finder of the sunken Titanic, confesses that
materials, the solidarity of its construction allows it to defy the
formed, no punch could have done a cleaner job of it. Consequently, it
This was perfectly true, but we had nearly forgotten the fact.
finally the peak of its mainmast. Then the dark mass disappeared, and
Ten of his companions followed him. All ten met the same fate.
or gin!”
generally drifted at a depth between 100 and 200 meters. It behaved in
“What’s that?”
violence. The Nautilus went into these brittle masses like a wedge,
simply nudged my big copper headpiece against Conseil’s headpiece. I
“You mean,” I said, “that such primitive methods are still all that
considerably deeper. There, through the open panels and in a midwater
this lounge.”
days. So this is still the question: if a promising opportunity comes
of marine origin.
white petals retracted into their red sheaths, the flowers vanished
Aronnax, and even though it doesn’t come from Havana, it will satisfy
would be lying in Mediterranean waters within two days, Conseil
The man drew near, and gluing his face to the panel, he stared at us.
Driven forward by its powerful propeller, the Abraham Lincoln headed
on the 66th at longitude 111 degrees west. In 1820 the Englishman
stern, where electromagnets of huge size activate a special system of
“This’ll mean a delay,” Ned said.
favoring us with one of those encouraging gestures that are used in
The Man of the Waters
basically electric in nature. Besides . . . look, look! It’s shifting!
by establishing a circuit between two wires immersed to different
“But it seems to me that in this semidarkness, amid this liquid that’s
even if it were 500 feet long, it would still be utterly harmless to
“We ought to be back before nightfall,” I said.
tons of silver held in suspension in seawater.”
thick as a strand of hair, and no longer than one-fifth of a
cooking, Ned prepared some bread from the artocarpus. Then the pigeon
Qunfidha on the east coast.
never left that vessel. The extraordinary intensity of his gaze seemed
It was apparently considered out of the question to dive by filling
“It’s one of the many islets with which this sea is strewn. For ships
it, so to speak, in order to transfer it one day to his dearly beloved
“Hee hee!” Ned put in, with a meaningful movement of his jaws.
“Yes, captain,” I replied, “but unfortunately we’ve brought back a
“With all due respect to master,” Conseil told me, “we’ll pass it by.”
There, even more powerful and obedient than gas, electricity did most
used for shipping; but the weakness of its slope between its starting
twenty-five wide, which by itself weighs 62 metric tons; this hull,
underbelly at a depth of only fifty meters. So only 150 feet separated
himself came to take our bearings. He didn’t address a word to me. He
permission, sir,” the harpooner added, “tomorrow at daybreak we’ll
“But in all these stories, is there any truth?” Conseil asked.
displacing 6,624 cubic meters.
a man accustomed to beefsteak and unfazed by regular doses of brandy
“Yes,” I replied, then ventured the opposite view. “But as for our
These thoughts swiftly crossed my mind while this strange individual
animal is a living fishhook, promising wealth and happiness to the
“I know it’s estimated,” I replied, “that there are 2,000,000 metric
each of us propped himself in a corner.
body dark all over. Anatomically, it’s distinguished from the white
hull, the outer cover, includes a keel fifty centimeters high by
Near eleven o’clock in the evening, I received a most unexpected visit
I let the gallant lad babble as he pleased, without giving him much in
where the eye lost its way. Huge glades opened up, seemingly cleared
visits. I saw him only at rare intervals. His chief officer regularly
it with care. He must have been a “mado” of high rank, because he
the Victoria reefs to starboard, positioned at longitude 130 degrees
a great circle of the earth. Where were we heading now, and what did
This dugong that Ned Land was preparing to attack was of colossal
these mornings master won’t find enough pieces of his manservant to
Only some government could own such an engine of destruction, and in
genus Delphinorhynchus, remarkable for an extremely narrow muzzle four
in the rays of the Torrid Zone, crosses the Atlantic, reaches Cape São
indicate the presence of waves undulating above me.
water, didn’t they see some fearsome cetacean that they were obliged
grove of low timber. It was an immense forest, huge mineral
prison. The starboard wall had moved forward to a point less than four
our leeward. Night was coming on. Eight o’clock had just struck. Huge
in the morning, it hove before the entrance to the Strait of
And this reaction wasn’t long in coming. For three months, during
shells from the branch Mollusca. Captain Nemo’s treasures were
“And that gives you?”
like. However, even though electricity doesn’t supply me with
spectrum. This riot of rainbow tints was a wonder, a feast for the
horizon. If you looked carefully, you could see its blackish back
The Gulf Stream
pace. Like a cetacean’s tail, its propeller churned the waves slowly.
that were six feet long with sharp little eyes and a huge mouth
bestowed on them by fishermen, more poetically inclined than
heard pumps operating within the ship, I felt the water lowering
again today.
It was coming on fast. If Captain Nemo let it approach, a chance for
Ten minutes later, Captain Nemo stopped suddenly. I thought he’d
even must live, for a thousand years. You understand?”
midst of the gloom. They were the eyes of gigantic crustaceans
south, and between longitude 125 degrees 30’ and 151 degrees 30’
pores perspire, from which I selected a wonderful Nemastoma
the command of Admiral Van Stabel. In this second year of the French
overhanging rock had to be gotten around. You slid on your knees, you
My mistake. It wanted to retreat, but the unearthly animal came at us
run that engine, I conclude: we’re saved.”
latitude where we are right now, the crew of the gunboat Alecto
“When?” I asked.
hour, basking in the aura of the ceiling lights, passing in review the
“Sir, we’ve got to do everything we can to get out of this jam! Let’s
Often, no longer seeing any way out, I thought we were imprisoned for
that the amount of oxygen dissolved in salt water increases rather
hear a single sound inside this dead-seeming boat. The vessel hadn’t
We went into the library. Just as I pushed open the door leading to
etc.
edges stand out in black as if from the brush of certain Flemish
they’d boned up on geometry and military strategy. And yet they can’t
world. It did nothing of the sort and kept moving toward the
from storms in the subpolar zones, in truth only to slide down the
“Professor, that troubled me, because it’s one of the best ships in
underground current had to go from the Red Sea to the Mediterranean
flycatchers, armed with a rifle unforeseen by either Remington or
Just then I was in the bow, leaning over the starboard rail. Conseil,
profound darkness. Ned Land soon dozed off, and to my astonishment,
resumed my work, hoping he might give me some explanation of the
“All right, all right!” the Canadian repeated in embarrassment.
Meanwhile the Nautilus’s speed had increased appreciably. So it was
“Yes, a hive,” the Canadian repeated, “with bees buzzing around!”
contrary. Never was hospitality more wholehearted than his. Yet in
I don’t think a hole’s existence can be more emphatically proven. Now
seashells, such as cowries, murex snails, and limpets.
industrial shears, and that would have been the finish of Captain Nemo
cetacean we’re after? Do you have any particular reasons for being so
festoons. Others looked like upside-down baskets from which wide
underwater excursion today?”
An Underwater Forest
Meanwhile Ned Land kept staring. His eyes were gleaming with desire at
“What’s more, Ned,” I said, “Captain Nemo himself did the honors in
The sun was already sending sufficient light under these waves. The
“What about these composers?” I said, pointing to sheet music by
dangling from the islander’s arm.
didn’t move a muscle, and the instrument couldn’t have been steadier
all.
man who doesn’t want to be convinced.
collect himself, and finally said:
of Vigo, located on Spain’s northwest coast and not blockaded.
the other side of the ship, either by circling around us or by gliding
whales, sperm whales, or unicorns can do any such thing.”
Soon the Canadian announced that the craft was a big battleship, a
for us, because in the form of salt butter or cheese, it would provide
“Until tomorrow,” the captain said simply; and we went back to the
will still carry you through the midst of the ocean’s wonders. Our
with violet festoons.
ice was still thin. We all reentered the interior. The main ballast
“No, professor, and for an excellent reason.”
“Those 11,000,000 eggs. But I’ll make one comment.”
which I was still unfamiliar.
diving suits, you no longer feel the liquid element, you simply think
“It’s because that same locality where Moses crossed with all his
stored it under high pressure. Near four o’clock Captain Nemo informed
“I’ll eat it.”
might say: “Ha! Now’s my chance to hunt lions and tigers!” But if
ocean. Every filament or ribbon, no matter how thin, stood ramrod
I headed to the central companionway. There, very puzzled, Ned Land
navigate aboard the Nautilus.”
mistaken, the submerged part of this Ice Bank is in a four-to-one
conscience . . . ?
also boasts the names glasswort, saxifrage, and sea fennel. Conseil
France—”
I could clearly see the shore, which featured a few sparse trees here
Mediterranean.
The Canadian was not mistaken. Cavorting around the Nautilus was a
me. Inside, the sun’s rays seemed to diminish by degrees. Their hazy
By then we had fared nearly 13,000 leagues from our starting point in
Conseil ventured to observe), toothless masked crabs, ebalia crabs,
masquerading under the name “guests” for the sake of everyday
The outlines of the continents allow the seas to be divided into five
buckling to the ground, while his companion did the same to
“Yes, smashed by the monster’s tusk! I believe it’s the sole injury
“Sir,” the captain answered me, “there can be no secrets between men
you’re invited to hunt sharks in their native element, you might want
favorable for taking his sights, I wanted to be present at the
freedom. He’s sure to take advantage of the first chance that comes
window I could see only its granite bedrock.
into a fellow countryman. Come on now, isn’t it time for our sudden
38th meridian, arriving at latitude 67 degrees 30’; and on January 30,
I realized what had happened. The Nautilus had just started off at
dreamed of chasing the unicorn than of trying for the Northwest
herds graze without fear on the ocean’s immense prairies. There I own
of antiquity classified with the flying fish, which are used chiefly
his companion’s witticism.
ichthyological research.
400-horsepower paddle wheels and a burden of 1,162 metric tons. Eight
skiff’s bow. Harpoons used for hunting whales are usually attached to
venturing forth in sailboats built from planks lashed together with
wholeheartedly into this opening, but it went up to the northwest,
Our climb continued. The gradients got steeper and narrower. Sometimes
arrive in home waters, we can do as we see fit. Besides, I don’t
survived where so many ships have perished! If this is the case and
hasn’t stirred.”
its quartered bunting. Then, turning toward the orb of day, whose last
half-basalt peak. From there our eyes scanned a vast sea, which
“Go on!”
surface of the water, it rolled gently, sometimes to one side,
By July 23 the Great Eastern was lying no farther than 800 kilometers
led to the platform, it was a metal cable fully charged with the
quivering on both sides of their tails. Nothing could have been more
genera, animals with a basically ‘cast-iron’ constitution that inhabit
the coast by the surf.
The Nautilus’s general heading was southeast, and it stayed at a depth
indefinitely because, as observers note, its gutta-percha casing is
FIRST PART
The Nautilus kept descending. I thought it would find calm again at
“Wrong, Ned my friend,” Conseil answered, “because I see only ordinary
Captain Nemo, wanting yet not wanting to see him. What would I say to
After going down a fairly steep slope, our feet trod the floor of a
stateroom adjoining mine. Not a sound reached my ear. His stateroom
opened his eyes. How startled he must have felt, how frightened even,
memorable, but their eggs made an excellent feast.
on to its topside, which emerged about eighty centimeters above
“The argonaut is free to leave its shell,” I told Conseil, “but it
the Scotia, the Java, and the Russia, all ships of top speed and,
Lincoln until it reached the waters of the Hudson River, at the tip of
on in the lounge. Inside the Nautilus all was gloom and silence. It
educated. Then, when the operation was over, we burned every trace of
horizontal plane. They all rose right up toward the surface of the
designation must be regarded as a translation of the Hebrew word
So the frigate was equipped for a far-off voyage and armed with
By April 20 we had risen to an average level of 1,500 meters. The
usual “As master wishes,” and I had to be content with that. As for
charging the air. A struggle of the elements was approaching.
something to see!”
At eleven o’clock the electric lights came back on. I went into the
minarets of this town, which used to be one of the wealthiest, busiest
In every big city the monster was the latest rage; they sang about it
current from his equipment into this conducting cable! It could
-3 degrees centigrade. But we were warmly dressed in furs, for which
hours, and the Nautilus’s heavy atmosphere already needs renewing. In
expect from you in such a case, even more than in any other, your
respect nothing but noisy mechanisms. Without thunderclaps, lightning
“True,” Captain Nemo went on, “but they’ll supply air for only two
CHAPTER 10
flush with the water, the Nautilus moved ahead at a moderate
after we hugged shore) never stopped questioning me. What could I
forked. Like certain flocks of birds, whose speed they equal, these
decimeters long, streaked with yellow, their heads having a
“What?” I asked.
of deserted waves! Nothing remotely resembling a gigantic narwhale, or
breathing. The double door opened, and accompanied by Captain Nemo
check. Now then, I have supplementary ballast tanks capable of
The engineer did so. The pressure gauge marked ten atmospheres. But no
this coral.
which Commander Bougainville explored in 1768, and to which Captain
because they usually live in the lower depths, xanthid crabs, pilumna
produce in Malaysia.
horizontal beneath our feet. Ten minutes went by.
At noon the next day, November 5, the agreed-upon delay expired. After
underbelly of the Ice Bank, but it had stopped in time and was
again. My eyes darted to every point of the horizon. I spotted the
without difficulty, pushed the chest out of the lounge. Then I heard
take him to task.
to form. It goes down south, skirts equatorial Africa, warms its waves
barometer, which had been falling for some days, forecast an
change.”
no longer count—and thanks to me, you’re going to learn the ultimate
belonging to ships that had run aground on the island’s reefs many
shore? Or, rather (and this thought did cross my mind), had the hand
that we’ll probably blow ourselves skyhigh?”
“Well?” I asked, not catching the captain’s meaning.
Creusot in France, its propeller shaft by Pen & Co. in London, the
opponent. Besides, before we could do anything, we had to be free, and
or 3.1 meters. Our fishermen frequently see specimens over 1.8 meters
of the ocean, and after emerging like a flying fish, it fell back into
“Right,” I said after observing carefully, “I can make out something
level with the beacon! Don’t you see a mass that seems to be moving
lampreys, snipefish covered with silver scales, cutlass fish whose
a long steamer to the west, running on our opposite tack. Its masting
stateroom with a bed, a washstand, and various other furnishings.
to glorify them by metamorphosing the males into sea gods and the
light burst through the uncovered windows.
of this marvelous bird that the islanders have poetically named “the
driving at.
“By no means. The skiff is attached to the topside of the Nautilus’s
keep us on board his vessel permanently?
seemed even yet to be guiding his wrecked three-master through the
mountains that form the island’s center, and we still hadn’t bagged a
me by the Rouquayrol device and the Nautilus’s atmosphere, which was
or Coromandel as he did in the forests of New Guinea.”
men, horses, and carriage to Brooklyn, that great New York annex
discovered my error.
to extract from the cell what little oxygen it contained, when
basically Scottish color. Soon he had forgotten my presence and was
“And you’re in the wrong, Mr. Land,” I went on. “That flat coastline
English, German, and Latin with equal fluency. Hence I could have
And Conseil, in his serene voice, described for the third time the
the Nautilus is rising, but this block of ice is rising with us, and
indicated the place I was to occupy.
was short-winded. Headaches and staggering fits of dizziness made me
guerilla warfare.
respect to master, they’ve discovered the narwhale and they’re
make out a thing. I felt my naked feet clinging to the steps of an
consume them without fear. They’re healthy and nourishing. I renounced
like paper tearing, and the Nautilus began settling downward.
mists, and we had to escape. Not a single day, or even a single hour,
the existence of such monsters, then the Norwegian stories of Bishop
breakers foaming over the deck. I hoisted and attached myself to the
without an established cause was charged to the monster’s
and never heard from again! Oh, what a gruesome tale these
tail. Hunted and trapped by fishermen, this valuable carnivore has
spectrum. From the fish branch there were manta rays, enormous
actual point where life rises humbly out of slumbering stone, but
the cramped space between Cape Bon and the Strait of Messina, the sea
“Weren’t its eyes prominently placed and considerably enlarged?”
A typical American order if I ever heard one. It would have sounded
CHAPTER 16
and I saw the pilot, a muscular man whose hands rested on the pegs of
events that had aroused my curiosity to a fever pitch. My companions
“Each part of it, Professor Aronnax, came from a different spot on the
delicate bath sponges whose prices run as high as 150 francs apiece:
settled my bill at that huge counter that was always under siege by a
levers and gears that transmit movement to the propeller’s shaft. The
considerable supply of them. These glass capsules are covered with a
Will the nationality of the stricken warship tell us the nationality
bolder pioneer would come, ax in hand, to clear away its dark
water. A brook was born. Little by little, vegetation spread. Tiny
fishermen. The annual harvest hasn’t yet begun. No matter. I’ll give
guard. Meanwhile I had assumed this rest period would be the turning
sumptuous meal, mixing meat from fish with vegetables from the sea,
KNOT 1.15 miles per hour
Just then night fell suddenly, and the waves barely surged in the
free ourselves? Before the Nautilus could return to the surface of the
whether this island offers other substances just as useful. Some fresh
placed in my presence Professor Pierre Aronnax, specialist in natural
In these deep strata would I meet up with more of Captain Nemo’s
Nemo replied, “and thanks to its underground fires, our globe is
The coxswain pronounced a few words in his bizarre language, and no
hatch. I opened it and went below to the lounge. By then the storm had
although, between the Greek Islands and Asia Minor, we didn’t find
doesn’t exclude the other.”
him. His shift over, each man surrendered to a gasping companion the
fluttered from branch to branch, needing only the proper upbringing to
silliest way.
and its end had simply been fastened to a small barrel that, while
Vana where the Nautilus was currently floating.
For some minutes the captain stood motionless, rooted to the spot
hearing noises from the savages, who were stamping on the platform and
sides with astonishing speed. I had to admit that Captain Nemo’s
concocting a kangaroo pie that will be the eighth wonder!”
Where was I? Where was I? I had to find out at all cost, I wanted to
miles per hour, and a depth between fifty and sixty meters.
and setbacks, but he triumphed because he has the volunteer
river running by Quebec, my hometown—and when I think about all this,
“I think so,” he answered me. “We’ve escaped being crushed. Now we
several varieties of goby, etc.; finally, some fish of larger
“True enough, Conseil.”
it sinking little by little.
with a violence less than comforting. By this point Ned Land had lost
with answering back. Commander Farragut was no longer content simply
balance, the level of this lake is also rising. We’ve gotten off with
“When I wanted to determine what increase in weight the Nautilus
waters. This incident seemed to fascinate Ned Land intensely. I’m sure
Nautilus’s spur before it charges that ship?”
coasts of Mahra and Hadhramaut, their undulating lines of mountains
Then Dumont d’Urville tried to depart; but his crews were run down
obituary notices by the Royal Mail, Inman, and Montreal lines; by
THE NEXT DAY, February 20, I overslept. I was so exhausted from the
lounge. The Nautilus sank a few meters beneath the waves, and the
“Bid us a fond farewell?” the Canadian exclaimed. “You mean beat us to
The captain pressed an electric bell three times. The pumps began to
Jules Verne (1828-1905) published the French equivalents of these
comparatively mild. I could feel the penetrating force of the steel
After its fishing was finished and its air supply renewed, I thought
Nautilus. Then he began his description as follows:
its upper jaw is armed with two long, pointed teeth that form
denoting the Farthest South attained until then; on the 27th he lay at
“Set astern of the pilothouse is a powerful electric reflector whose
words, those whose spines have vertebrae made of cartilage.
penetrating power.”
even the painter’s brush can’t depict the effects unique to the liquid
all others, as can be seen in a recent survey of official
familiar with the work of scientists on Saturn or Jupiter. But since
reliability.”
By sunrise we were off. Carried by an inbound current, the longboat
forgive us.”
the Count de La Pérouse. For long hours they competed in speed with
majority. Only two persons face each other here: master on one side,
“Ned my friend,” I said, “answer me honestly. Are you bored with this
of carbon dioxide and is no longer fit for breathing.
*Bailly believed that Atlantis was located at the North Pole! Ed.
arrival of a steamboat that provides bimonthly service from North
Meanwhile the captain fell silent and stared at the element he had
overhead.
it’s because oysters are the only dish that never causes
its heating equipment, the Nautilus’s temperature, needless to say,
I drew closer. He looked up sharply, with a frowning brow, and said in
course was set due west.
unique to the waters of the Caribbean.
Near eleven o’clock in the morning, we cleared the lower slopes of the
credit sufficient to cover the babirusa and, Conseil at my heels, I
breather’s needs. But in my case, since I face considerable pressures
But this luminous globe hadn’t been turned on without good
“What’s that?”
miraculous catch of zoophytes, fish, and reptiles.
navigators after they saw numerous curls of smoke rising from the
and ask me why I wanted to escape! I felt in a perpetual state of
been surveyed and drawn up by the hydrographic engineer Vincendon
called the cow shark that’s equipped with six respiratory slits, the
other. Inevitably, the most enthusiastic supporters of the undertaking
room truly at rest in the midst of the waters!”
for the epithet “clowns,” black Commerson anglers equipped with their
pronounce his daily phrase. But that day it was replaced by a
me—in ecstasy over freshly grilled pork! Please grant me a pardon as
lips:
dimensions much greater than any found in the north Atlantic. From
dismal silence was terrifying.
see. The attack has come. Our reply will be dreadful. Get back
duplicate:
On the morning of the 24th, in latitude 12 degrees 5’ south and
liquid element, but also to probe the ocean’s most daunting mysteries.
explain them. I’ve seen the Nautilus at work out in front of the
diffuse gas, and torrents of lava slid to the foot of the mountain,
“They’re within their rights,” Conseil answered.
called Voyage Under the Waters, Twenty-five Thousand Leagues Under the
stores, so full of game were these seas. Our trawl brought up in its
about thirty miles. For one instant I could see their lofty peaks.
“West of which meridian?” I asked quickly, hoping the captain’s reply
I got out, Conseil at my heels, leaving the two men in the skiff.
lived on this floating island, it hasn’t shown a sign of life.”
But soon these last representatives of animal life vanished, and three
Introduction
“And I might add, Mr. Land,” I said, “that the waters wouldn’t have
sharks?”
tomorrow, March 21, if, after accounting for refraction, the sun’s
tasks in a state of comparative calm.
“Good!” he said. “That explains perfectly all that bellowing we heard,
“SIR,” CAPTAIN NEMO SAID, showing me the instruments hanging on the
which wellnigh caught us by surprise just as it did Sir Walter Scott’s
“Here, Professor Aronnax, are the different dimensions of this boat
under the waves, only to rise and sink once more in the year 69
in tow!
“See anything out there, professor?”
of Mexico and notable for their overlapping shells, the latter some
modifiers. But I was never in a position to verify this because,
engineers who understood the languages of neither the French physicist
crossing that part of the whole Mediterranean so fertile in
noticeably changed course. After touching the Tropic of Capricorn at
Consequently, to calculate the value of this collection was, I should
“What happened?” Conseil asked. “Some new phenomenon?”
“Aren’t we going to put on our diving suits?” I asked.
I could observe these strange walls quite closely: our sounding lines
you if you’re a connoisseur.”
Europe and America, naval officers from every country, and at their
a frightened gesture, stand, and gather himself to spring back to the
gooseberries that were adorned with reddish tendrils and gave off a
10,000,000 francs. It was a superb natural curiosity rather than a
(Madeira, the Azores, the Canaries, the Cape Verde Islands) still
left uncovered by the ebbing waters. We had run aground at full tide
this was the great insurmountable obstacle. When the sun appeared for
THIS BRUTALLY EXECUTED capture was carried out with lightning
I was on the platform just then. After determining our position, the
most should be enough to operate it.”
discovery, in which a new set of levers generates considerable
it, ricocheted near the captain, and vanished into the sea.
“Yes,” I muttered, “we know how to die!”
Just then I saw the captain’s weapon spring to his shoulder and track
waters of the equator.”
And so it went, some new wonder constantly delighting us. Conseil
a sign of life. The skiff stayed alongside in the same place we had
and are used mainly in the creation of embroidery for church
Indeed, other devilfish had appeared at the starboard window. I
mechanically. Between the lines I kept seeing fearsome, wide-open
something fine and good, whether it comes from friend or enemy. All
“I’ve no idea. But wherever it’s from, it will sink before
more than justified Ned Land’s worst fears.
fish-filled waterways: anglerfish whose comical movements qualify them
secrets.
“Sir,” Ned Land told me, “if that boat gets within a mile of us, I’m
I say 150 meters, although I had no instruments for estimating this
tyrannical rulers, the Ottoman Empire of Turkey. But since then I had
what are 300 meters to the Nautilus?”
a whitish belly, and eleven rows of teeth, bigeye sharks with necks
most fertile in the world. Sure enough, I found a volume entitled
stopping halfway to my mouth, Ned Land’s completing its assignment.
work, Commander Farragut authorized him to make his way aboard the
handrail around the platform were lowered. Likewise the pilothouse and
“We’ll soon find out!” Conseil said.
conjecture.”
figure for major storms.
field from below like a fearsome battering ram. It split the barrier
his habitual reserve? Had he said too much? For a few moments he
I spent the evening in reading, writing, and thinking. Then drowsiness
attack?”
powder stores had been ignited. The thrust of the waters was so great,
before.
“—1.018 for the waters of the Ionian Sea, and 1.029 for the waters of
cities. Under my eyes there perhaps lay the warlike town of Makhimos
Nautilus’s occupants, friends bound together in death as in life,
applies to any escape attempt, whether it happens in two years or two
Orient.”
and climbed the central companionway. Hatches that had been closed the
you. But that isn’t the case, and in all honesty, I don’t think
Translated from the Original French by F. P. Walter
d’Urville had given the name “Island of the Search”; we lay right in
such a depth in the ocean, each square centimeter on your body’s
the SEAS—rather than the SEA, as with many English editions. Verne’s
me to breathe. The heavy air was no longer sufficient for the full
masters were represented by a Raphael Madonna, a Virgin by Leonardo da
ship, if we couldn’t ward off the blow that threatened it, at least we
this cage.
“That we’ll encounter advantageous conditions for escaping just as
the north. This cape forms the tip of Arabia Petraea, which lies
complete to the smallest substantive detail.
the Abraham
amount of added water should make this sea’s level higher every
them. But will this opportunity ever arise? The human being, robbed of
a devilfish so large a whole cavalry regiment could maneuver on it.”
Nautilus. The sea was fairly calm. A mild breeze blew from shore. In
The grave was then covered over with the rubble dug from the seafloor,
Mediterranean basin, whose maximum depth we found at 3,000 meters. The
So the reaction set in. At first, discouragement took hold of people’s
BY THE NEXT MORNING, November 18, I was fully recovered from my
unchecked from the mouth of the Rio de la Plata to Florida!”
was solemnly promising myself to enrich the Paris Museum with it, when
to the Canadian, who was accustomed to freedom and activity. It was a
triangular type, I noticed some half a decimeter long, with brown
of the propeller churned the waves with increasing speed, and the
“But, captain, you have a tremendous speed of movement that doesn’t
For an instant I thought the poor man entwined by the devilfish might
A seaman couldn’t be wrong on this topic, and I told the Canadian what
didn’t see one local dugout canoe.
beauty of their forms. Never before had I been given the chance to
had reported that some medals and a Cross of St. Louis had been found
it existed at all.
transparent, with white and yellow markings. Besides, they were
peppery flavor I relish, furrowed heart cockles whose shells have
Half lying on a couch in the library, I was suffocating. My face was
weighed less than the water, and by an unusual effect of specific
into a wooden table next to which several stools had been set. The
But we couldn’t stop. We had to follow the captain, who headed down
and the 60th parallel, the sea is covered with floating ice of
advantage of us! This is sheer cruelty!”
Nautilus, amid flurries in the air.
At 8:25 a second collision took place. This time astern. I grew
“You may not, sir.”
some of them had moved forward over the heads of coral to within two
brown weeds, there floated objects originating from all over: tree
“No, sir, and I might add that it’s quite a humble one next to
the East Indies, and that part of the ocean washing the coasts of
whalers. I’ve chased plenty of cetaceans, I’ve harpooned a good
“Yes, captain,” I replied.
“Well then, it will serve master right!”
Canadian’s wit is half French, and Mr. Ned Land made this clear in his
Nautilus at such a distance, still less that it knew what this
In essence, on July 20, 1866, the steamer Governor Higginson, from the
“Watch out!” he said.
Waters to the poor Indian from Ceylon was accepted by the latter with
liquor extracted by the Kamchatka process from the seaweed known by
unfit for breathing.”
rock and scrawled this one word:
“So, captain, your men practice the trade of miners here?”
“I can see we’re starting to understand each other, professor,”
centimeters in width, and were ten or more years old.
today is June 1, 1868, or the 13th day in the Month of
blue, yellow, and green) that actually respond to tinkling handbells,
DURING THE NIGHT of December 27-28, the Nautilus left the waterways of
I looked to port and saw nothing but the immenseness of these tranquil
sprawling, others standing or hanging like coral outgrowths. I told
catalog, if some recalcitrant listener confuses the argonaut, which is
renounced completely. We were being swept westward, and I estimate
“A ship!” I exclaimed.
proposition, when superior force can wipe out the best arguments?
familiar with this nearly universal language. But I only knew it, as I
little. “Was it unintentionally that the Abraham Lincoln hunted me on
developments.
I’ll let the reader decide what faces the Canadian made during this
Some Days Ashore
hammerhead sharks, spotted dogfish that frequent these waters, big
off, on the outskirts of a thicket that masked the horizon to our
occupy the space of one square millimeter. Perhaps you’ll encounter
CHAPTER 12
close enough for us to be heard—or seen, because the moon would wax
“Sir,” he told me, “I’ll die if I don’t sample a little breadfruit
“Haven’t seen or heard a thing!” the Canadian replied. “I haven’t even
and didn’t reappear.
worthwhile, available means!”
underwater machine, have aroused public passions on those two
under pressure in special tanks; which, if need be, allows me to
“But don’t you realize, Professor Aronnax,” the Canadian replied,
that cautious, sure-footed lad got it back to the Nautilus in one
“Did we strike bottom?” I asked.
Possibly the Canadian was familiar with this distinction, but Conseil
We didn’t search in vain, and near noontime we had an ample supply of
opposite sensation of going from the deepest gloom to the brightest
genus name regardless, do not yet form wings; and the finback whale,
and the many strange sights captivated my imagination.
me, this would not be the mildest.
Canal, but the day after tomorrow, you’ll be able to see the long
the secreted rubble binding them. This, at least, is the theory of
sail—or I take out my oars—and I go for a spin.”
To starboard, a prominent bulge on the sea bottom caught my
“Sir,” the commander replied, “to you, I’m simply Captain Nemo;* to
its nose at the frigate by running a full circle around us! A howl of
inner bay formed by the spit of Sandy Hook, it hugged this
walls, sprinkled all over with mica-rich dust. Ned Land tapped these
potential—myself, I’d say the success—of this attempt. Maneuvers that
capture alive. And even after they’re dead, there’s still a major
didn’t follow the exact course of the Zealous and the new Astrolabe,
rudder—couldn’t return to leeward after us. So we could count only on
the object they had sighted. “We’re old chums, whales and I, and I
East Indies. But the most astonishing event, which proves that these
the sorters begin their twofold task. First they remove the layers of
“They’re seals and walruses.”
distance, despite the noise of wind and sea, we could distinctly hear
Among bony fish, I noted grizzled wrasse unique to these seas,
minds, opening the door to disbelief. A new feeling appeared on board,
us from the surface of the water. Little by little the Ice Bank was
blennies, and salmon; it was the bullhead of the northerly seas, a
tips of Crespo Island had disappeared during the night. The sea,
beak made of horn and shaped like that of a parrot—opened and closed
that enables the coasts of Europe to be decked in eternal
with victims, then its crosstrees bending under clusters of men,
came into my head for the first time . . . ! But even so, that voice
solitude reigned over this gathering place of pearl fishermen. As
Nautilus, all led me down a plain trail. No! Captain Nemo wasn’t
sworn hate for humanity, a hate that perhaps was bent on some dreadful
fight it at close quarters.
I then entered a dining room, decorated and furnished in austere good
this boat did have a secret to keep—which seemed rather likely—he
figure. Captain Nemo was with them.
of Captain Nemo?
to view with distrust?
proper home, these questions had to be left for later. To answer them
doubt,” our bosun said, “because there isn’t enough water for him!” So
Involuntarily my eyes flew to the window, but I couldn’t stand the
which Captain Nemo did the honors that day. It was the coral realm.
leaned into their oars; the moorings were cast off and we pulled
“You don’t understand?” he said to me.
had to keep me going, and attending to our self-preservation became
“Yes . . . indeed . . . maybe,” the Canadian replied, staggered by
like beach sand, which preserves the impressions left by the
wrest the Spanish crown from King Philip V and to place it on the head
indicated any forthcoming improvement in our situation, and I
on board agreed with us perfectly, and for my part, I could easily
On July 20 we cut the Tropic of Capricorn at longitude 105 degrees,
we’ve been tendered any enlistment offers. Consequently, it’s
“Gladly.”
with dynamic ones, or we’ll be open to serious error. Comparatively
undeniable. Its hole was real enough that it had to be plugged up, and
While we were walking, I thought the lights of our Ruhmkorff devices
I could only thank my host.
Work began immediately and was carried on with tireless
“Well, Mr. Naturalist,” the Canadian asked in a gently mocking tone,
“I’m listening, captain,” I said, not knowing what my partner in this
“I explain it on two grounds,” I replied. “In the first place, because
16. Strolling the Plains
“My friends,” I said, “to a question couched in these terms, our
“Till the moment,” Ned Land answered, “when some frigate that’s faster
narrows of the Torres Strait.
plan?”
arranged like big stone foundations, among which there gaped black
ocean depths.
shrimp, waterside gebia shrimp, and all sorts of edible species, but
infusoria. You won’t pull it off, because if I’m not mistaken, certain
caves so deep our electric rays couldn’t light them to the far ends.
blades of its propeller weren’t churning the waves. A minute
water they take to their hearts.
“The first way,” he went on, “is death by crushing. The second is
Finally, as a last resort, I hauled out everything I could remember
hence able to hold 150.72 metric tons, and if I fill them with water,
“19.3 miles per hour, sir.”
$2,000.00.”
“My gallant Ned,” I replied, laughing, “those were artificial pearls,
history lesson.
a memory?”
chief islands in Oceania.
me to go ashore, an invitation I felt obliged to decline.
existence. Moreover, I hoped some books even more recent would permit
I’ll go perch on the bobstays under the bowsprit, and if we can get
lengths from the animal and coasted. Not a soul breathed on board. A
had visited during my first excursion under the waters of the Pacific
positions on the charts separated by a distance of more than 700
longitude 60 degrees 35’ west of the meridian of Greenwich. From their
distinguishes a painter’s studio.
highly edible. They brayed like donkeys. The size of a goose with
things God never intended for human eyes.”
the background of the skies. This forecast fair weather. And so it
mysteries of the place.”
Visibly baffled, the harpooner said nothing. Under the conditions in
at a depth of about five meters, he fell to his knees and stuffed his
this outlandish notion. But to tell the truth, wearing these heavy
mountain regions, and in fact, as the Nautilus was executing certain
“As for cartilaginous fish,” Conseil went on unflappably, “they
calculations, this reduction is only .0000436 per atmosphere, or per
could see and feel the ship righting itself. The floor was becoming
complicity, I absolve you of all responsibility, since I myself make
I gaped at the captain. I thought my hearing had gone bad.
seven islands making up this group. I could clearly distinguish the
tension between Nemo and hot-tempered harpooner Ned Land, and Ned’s
trying to damage its core. Captain Anderson, his officers, and the
the open Mediterranean by the day after tomorrow.”
By then the Nautilus had returned to the surface of the
sudden that decompression took place too quickly, which could have led
“Ask it, professor.”
of ice, which would break open from the impact?”
back, “and it had better listen!”
the radiant orb rose swiftly.
sugar loaf, which he gripped between his feet while a rope connected
by Jules Verne, based on the original French texts published in Paris
France ventured to escort with a fleet of twenty-three vessels under
of 66 degrees 30’, he named the Adélie Coast and eight days later, the
it’s the truth. I might add, in fact, that the air bladders of fish
“Professor Aronnax,” the captain said to me, “would you consent to
ice, some of which measured several miles in length, their heights
phosphorescent flickers coming from our movements. I stared at the
it’s not unusual to encounter whales so sound asleep they can
eastward, the moon appeared. The surface of the sea glistened under
passed well out from El Tur, which sat at the far end of a bay whose
Among the various fish inhabiting it, some I viewed, others I
madreporic origin discovered by Vasco da Gama in 1499 and one of
an international deed, which would have insured that any
of the ocean to renew our oxygen supply. I headed for the central
“And why do people say so?”
way to black basaltic rock: here, lying in slabs all swollen with
latitude 70 degrees and longitude 130 degrees, or abiding by the
windows like opaque shutters. There were American triggerfish for
under the waves, Ned, for every thirty-two feet of water above you,
great men of history who had spent their lives in perpetual devotion
For his part, Conseil thought he spotted a turtle six feet wide and
mistake for stewed pork. My chef is a skillful food processor who
Captain Nemo reentered near midnight. I could hear the ballast tanks
And so the monster surfaced again, despite the endless witticisms
13. Some Figures
still withstood the action of the waters. One day perhaps, some
pick up.
“Indulge your astonishment, my friend, and have a look, because
Atlantis. Certain authors have even held that the many weeds strewn
its commander.
Furious, Ned tried to see through the mists on the horizon. He still
Persia for 3,000,000 francs, and they surpassed that other pearl owned
fully formed and free-moving, and whose gills take the shape of a
virtually unknown cone snail from the genus Coenodullus; every variety
cockleboat. It’s an actual boat indeed. It transports the animal that
“What are a few hours more or less, so long as we get out.”
leagues down. Which is tantamount to saying that if you could reach
Among other zoophytes present in these shallows, there were a few
In essence, I was already familiar with the whole forward part of this
frequent; their Greek name anthias means “flower,” and they live up to
Like Shakespeare’s King Lear he courts death and madness in a great
400 kilograms of that valuable oil called “spermaceti.” The sperm
I strolled for a little while from the lounge into the library. My
long and with muscles so powerful they could leap above the waves,
Nautilus.
whale or a common sperm whale that soon disappeared amid a chorus of
making contact with them. In fact, if they didn’t produce their own
“Tell it to the marines, sir,” answered the stubborn Canadian.
Emerging from the Strait of Gibraltar, the Nautilus took to the high
“I haven’t the foggiest notion,” the Canadian replied.
leather and curved for maximum comfort. Light, movable reading stands,
Unlikely choices for a man who avoided populated areas! So would he go
“No, my friend.”
of pearls more than twenty miles long.
us homeward but rather into that huge ocean washing the shores of both
Near seven o’clock in the evening, the Nautilus lay half submerged,
they were, neither their tails or their tusks could puncture the
“Professor Pierre Aronnax?” he said to me.
shut. The magical vision disappeared. But for a good while I kept
So he went up and down several times. He gathered only about ten
Conseil, being very possessive of his fish, rushed at it, and before I
meters.
slumber. Conseil, a creature of habit, came to ask “how master’s night
at making off with the Nautilus’s secrets, so generously unveiled for
volute snails, olive shells, miter shells, helmet shells, murex
discussions in The Indian Archipelago, in Cosmos published by Father
Was it the voice of some poor devil left behind in midocean, some
ocean depths, and the margins were covered with his notes, which
little Roti Island, part of this same group, whose women have a
If we accept the hypotheses of the microbiologist Ehrenberg—who
to make a gift of it to the zoo at the Botanical Gardens, which
“Too bad for him!” Conseil said.
air were admitted into every part of the Nautilus.
it impossible for you to see what you aren’t meant to see. Do you
I soon grew accustomed to this bizarre arrangement, likewise to the
let go. They were hauled in, still sticking to the turtles that came
“We accept,” I replied. “Only, I’ll ask your permission, sir, to
this sea that dwell in madreporic cavities and whose bases are twisted
box that topped my head, spending more air on empty words than was
attack the beasts with axes.”
“What! The archaeotherium, hyracotherium, oreodonts, cheiropotamus,
group Pisciforma, and finally, order Cetacea. As for the family in
lives of amphibians, which can spend long hours either at sea or on
sandy bottom with startling distinctness as deep as 145 meters down,
water game. Among the great wind riders—carried over long distances
“That’s how I see it,” the Canadian said.
a human being, a representative of that race from which he had fled
This Red Sea is 2,600 kilometers long with an average width of 240. In
The volcanic nature of this enormous pit was apparent all around us. I
We turned on our Ruhmkorff devices and went along a coral shoal in the
which undoubtedly viewed us as some enormous baleen whale of great
would have only a moderate effect on these islanders, who reputedly
whole being. Then the visions disappeared and left me in utter
“Unless they’re fattening us up!” Ned shot back.
“The frigate?” Conseil replied, rolling over on his back. “I think
perfectly natural explanation for why, despite the best spyglasses,
been reached by the boldest navigators—wasn’t this an absolutely
influx to reach us, and I soon found it. Above the door opened an air
“As master wishes!” Conseil replied.
The Nautilus entered the Strait of Jubal, which leads to the Gulf of
hadn’t noticed. Now some twenty dugout canoes were surrounding the
seek independence under the seas, he remained a human being before all
they’ve finished depriving our water drop of its mineral nutrients,
long before. I was hoping to detect the secret of his life in the last
they use?”
of tourists—have yet to voyage in a submarine with the luxury and
pitted with dark caves but not offering a single gradient we could
CHAPTER 23
inaccessible spot without facing exhaustion or danger, as if our
“Surely. How can I make gunpowder on my ship when I have no saltpeter,
it, when floating on the waves, to lie nine-tenths below the surface
species. But the creature at issue here was an Echeneis osteochara,
existence of a giant narwhale.
of them.”
crew when some unpredictable whale lifted its blackish back above the
where tree trunks are worn down and worked into “a shaggy fur,” as
coasts of your continents or islands, show me any offshore mooring
tantrum over it.”
sheet iron. “Open up there, you antisocial navigators!”
would never give us freedom of movement aboard his vessel. Now then,
to twist his goatee; he chewed on it.
“What’s your count?”
depths? What creatures inhabit, or could inhabit, those regions twelve
covered by a carpet of mollusks and zoophytes. Among other specimens
Nevertheless, I’m well aware that the Nautilus is drawing near to
story might well meet with some skepticism.
came from, where he was heading, how deep he was taking us? In short,
discovered in 1801 by Captain Crespo, which old Spanish charts called
still found these provisions inadequate. But fortune smiled on
the 16th, the Nautilus hadn’t slowed down in an odd fashion. This was
the Nautilus. Steaming sulfurous fumes uncoiled in the midst of waves
How many other marvelous new specimens I still could have observed if,
“But how do you return to the ship?”
serpent with a bluish gray belly, which, without the gold lines over
Even so, I had just returned from an arduous journey, exhausted and
find savages there? Where aren’t there savages? And besides, are they
bromide, sulfate of magnesia, calcium sulfate, and calcium
better luck in his hunting than on the day before, and he wanted to
around their caudal area, some with color zones and elegantly corseted
But just then, lifted off by the tide’s final undulations, the
things never to be seen by people not placing themselves beyond
and sepia ink. It seemed as if these viscous tentacles grew back like
“Perfectly familiar. During the easterly monsoon season, birds of
At a signal from Captain Nemo, one of his men stepped forward and, a
articulate a few words, and I heard him repeat at intervals:
harvesting this very Bay of Vigo, you’re simply forestalling the
stretched out my hand to take it, weigh it, fondle it! But the captain
to operate his submersible as an engine of destruction. Soon I felt
“No, sir,” he replied, “this time an accident.”
“Sir, even though you’ve cut yourself off from humanity, I can see
numerous “ladyfingers” warned of daylong winds.*
wet. You can understand that my Nautilus wouldn’t have enough water
“But the sun—”
My article was hotly debated, causing a fine old uproar. It rallied a
had a white belly with a spotted, ash-gray back and was carried along
When the Nautilus was ready to resume its underwater travels, I went
walls next to which the ocean’s depth is considerable.
the French historian Michelet, a man is revived by one of the most
to set you free.”
formation of fresh ice. Obviously this southernmost basin froze over
“And you’re offering to take me to them?”
Meanwhile, crazed with terror, the unhinged Papuans beat a retreat. As
“Let’s go back up!” I replied.
be that as it may, you’re already familiar with the first use I’ve
the Tropic of Cancer at longitude 172 degrees. On the 27th it passed
and I’ll see you this evening!”
We were overloaded when we arrived at the skiff. However, Ned Land
electric bullets that, by means of a spring, automatically took their
different parts of the ship, take many readings, and strike an
offchance that this creature might be the last of its line, wouldn’t
were committed in our maneuvers. Nevertheless, we can’t prevent a loss
relatives in the tidal wave on December 23, 1854, that toppled part of
Captain Nemo’s first concern was to revive this unfortunate man. I
yours. You own 6,000 or 7,000 volumes here . . .”
annelid worms one and a half meters long, furnished with a pink
the impossible had been mysteriously achieved by man himself: this
“Oh, professor, what are you feeding me?” the Canadian answered in a
chemists it’s a mixture of calcium phosphate and calcium carbonate
part of Dumont d’Urville’s general staff during his final voyage to
moderate magnitude but definitely noticeable. This boat, this
out on the bed to soothe my bodily agitation. My nerves calmed a
Ned Land
of electric light.
headless mollusks to supply the 315 grams that satisfy one man’s
“Right,” I said. “Hence a timely warning to those investors would be
already too advanced for you to depend on an ice breakup.”
they’ll rip our hull into a thousand pieces!”
reworked its political content, devising new nationalities for Nemo
a few seconds, he would straighten up and resume his walk.
perhaps speak to me! One gesture from him could obliterate me, a
CAPTAIN NEMO stood up. I followed him. Contrived at the rear of the
executed, and for half an hour no danger seemed to threaten him. So I
degrees and headed for the seas of China.
“There’s a powerful, obedient, swift, and effortless force that can be
couldn’t be far away when the Nautilus would attack its adversary, and
been like jumping off a train racing at this speed, a rash move if
roots clutching broken soil, its boughs clearly outlined against the
could have been better armed. We had every known mechanism, from the
to serious organic disorders and given us those internal injuries so
where life is no longer possible! What unheard-of scenery, and why are
strata beyond the reach of our soundings, and which some development
At first I was dragged about twenty feet under. I’m a good swimmer,
Lincoln.
Nautilus’s spur sliced through these whitish waves, and I watched it
with an actual spur, like ironclad frigates or those warships called
previously crossed my mind, and I was determined to keep on my
fact has been omitted, not a detail has been exaggerated. It’s the
emotionlessness. He crossed his arms. He pondered. The Nautilus did
the sound of surf chafing against rocks, or by the distant moan of a
through the gaping panels. The Nautilus was motionless. Its ballast
the northerly seas of the Pacific, racing after whales sighted,
supply. . . . Yes, that was a close call!”
been his deathblow.
Ned and Conseil took seats on a couch, and right off the Canadian said
English feet—he was powerfully built, serious in manner, not very
freedom. Besides, I counted on the future to resolve this important
barred our path. It wasn’t the Ice Bank as yet, just huge ice fields
Cunard Co., whose mail-carrying charter had just been renewed,
he no doubt planned to make his observatory. It was an arduous climb
meter-and-a-half difference in level between high and low seas. Today
I was mulling this over when the captain approached, cool and calm,
straps fastened the air devices onto our backs. As for the Ruhmkorff
Captain Nemo gave orders to increase speed; at once the engine stepped
I tried again, telling the tale of our adventures, clearly
Atlanteans, he said, resided on an immense continent greater than
ceiling since that surface was the Ice Bank itself, more than 400
the Nautilus! Two, three, five down! And just think how we’ll devour
that day. It was hidden from our eyes by clouds squeezed together on
Soon Jidda faded into the shadows of evening, and the Nautilus went
supplied by the sea, and some foods whose nature and derivation were
“A collector, sir, nothing more. Formerly I loved acquiring these
“Maybe that’s why!” Ned Land replied, staring hard at me.
With one hand I seized the arm of my loyal Conseil.
the remains of some astronomical instruments, a piece of sternrail,
“Yes.”
“Let’s go back up, professor. We mustn’t push our luck and expose the
hoisting them onto the deck of a ship, chopping off the tail with a
dives and drags all its occupants down into the depths.”
appeared next to Nea Kameni, and since then, these three islets have
a hazardous undertaking whose purpose was to hunt an animal that could
Trondheim set up an altar one day on an immense rock. After he
“At least, captain, your dead can sleep serenely there, out of the
picked up a pencil, and began to sketch it.
and was navigating well out from any shore, a few meters beneath the
“The sea is rough,” I said.
our personal interests, I’m sorry this opening the professor mentions
coast. I spotted Jidda, an important financial center for Egypt,
Square, took Fourth Ave. to its junction with Bowery St., turned into
The poor fellow was done for. Who could tear him from such a powerful
“Thank heavens!” I said to myself. “Conseil will never want to come
Nautilus’s crew could dress themselves at little cost, without needing
who seemed utterly uninterested in the question exciting us and was
our submersible. I couldn’t stop marveling at these animals so
used to inhabit these shores; but English and American whalers, in a
sprang to their feet.
and Melbourne.
nowadays steamers providing service between Suez and the South Seas
“Still, master should tell our story,” Conseil said to me. “Perhaps
France, in the wake of those zodiacal stars due to twinkle over it in
stems, numerous edible sea urchins of various species, plus green sea
In reply to a question Conseil asked me about the growth rate of these
got more unpredictable, often taking us to great depths. Several times
“I can picture it perfectly,” Conseil replied. “But will master tell
tolerably skeptical tone.
that by this point there was no such thing as too fast, since minutes
time for boredom. The latest wonder is always the most astonishing,
and I imagine our stomachs are running ahead of the chief cook’s
varying from seventy to eighty meters. Often the horizon seemed
running with propeller in reverse, it swept us along at great speed.
rock, there snaked long, hardened lava flows inlaid with veins of
Land leaped up the companionway. But as soon as his hands seized the
Captain Nemo, have reached the South Pole at 90 degrees, and I hereby
these waterways. Under the combined efforts of wind and 400-horsepower
covered with a crosswise yellow band in the shape of a Greek t, swarms
I understood this maneuver. It was too late to take action. The
diagonal that reached below the horizon. I held the chronometer. My
Land. My agitation increased. My pulse was throbbing violently. I
humanity, deserves fair treatment. Have you considered how a love of
Poland against Tsarist Russia. The Poles were quashed with a violence
thought were made of petrified blood.
At his orders the craft was eased off, in other words, it was raised
and a basaltic gravel called “tuff,” together with bits of lava and
didn’t seem to see us. His facial features, usually so emotionless,
east looked like a slightly blurred mass in a damp fog.
a very long rope that pays out quickly when the wounded animal drags
King, are the best charts for untangling the snarl of this narrow
fell back around us like hail. Through brute force alone, the
give in. “There is something we can do.”
The Canadian returned to Conseil’s side. As soon as I was dressed, I
there were two of us. Lastly, I can vouch—as improbable as it
speed. Kindly allow me to sort them out using this whimsical system of
3,832,558 square myriameters, hence more than 38,000,000,000
plans into execution in the gulf, either by reaching shore or by
Commander Farragut’s characteristic stubbornness, the frigate would
relegating it to the realm of fiction, that charge had to be dropped.
to me, I threw back at him a phrase he had used in the Torres Strait:
shore, the Abraham Lincoln doubled that solitary islet at the tip of
forever, and I’m deeply indebted to you—”
by the hand of man, and I sometimes wondered whether some residents of
the skiff was being detached and launched to sea. For an instant it
Despite the buzzing in my head, I soon could hear vibrations under the
the surface, sometimes diving to avoid some ship, and so I could
first. His ax disappeared between the two enormous mandibles, and the
marine animal.”
thought I recognized two or three sperm whales equipped with the
crossed this aqueous mass and dispersed its dark colors. I could
Hiva, chief member of this island group that belongs to France. I
“Order Sirenia, group Pisciforma, subclass Monodelphia, class
“The sun isn’t enough, Conseil. Can it restore heat to a corpse?”
terrific gift for getting around. Now, professor, you know even better
have cleared my Arabic tunnel!”
ocean, there to breathe in good whale fashion. So the ship’s mode of
happy new year?”
calculate his longitude, which he double-checked against his previous
oysters for which he risked his life would have no pearl in them!
head imprisoned in a metal capsule, while he receives air from above
so well, the animal went into his sack to join the honeycombs.
discussed it with me. Sometimes I heard melancholy sounds
turning into the spitting image of its commander.
existence. Deep down, the Canadian must have been overjoyed at not
afternoon, all contact with Europe broke off. The electricians on
century, and to our globe’s detriment, because its heat is its life.”
random. Seemingly, all supervision had been jettisoned. Under these
enjoyed excellent health that defied all ailments, owned solid
“No doubt, sir, you’ve felt that I waited rather too long before
I extended to him. He never extended his own.
platform. They were examining the ship’s circumstances, exchanging a
We arrived at the dining room, where we found breakfast served.
Nautilus, at the thought of being hauled in front of Captain Nemo and
in some unknown sea! Unless he intended the results of his experiments
Furcy, and the Italian Landi; they’re equipped with a special system
“You were saying, professor?” he asked me.
to see if the Nautilus’s heading was actually taking us closer to the
with his great stature, was able to determine it.
that the air contained in the Nautilus would be exactly enough for 625
“or the drawback in not having one universal language!”
nothing left for the ship that carries them! I have absolutely no wish
obliged me to grant you hospitality. If I were to part company with
waterways, I don’t know the whales that frequent them?”
the books that make up my favorite reading, you’ll find the work
“All right, listen and learn, Ned my friend! Bony fish are subdivided
sometimes to the other.
“No, sir. Accordingly, I’m in the habit of staying in the pilothouse
Slim chance, but hope springs eternal in the human breast! Besides,
generis.* Captain Nemo noticed the negative impression it made on me.
skiff before leaving the Nautilus.
“packs,” or broken tracts, called “patches” when they’re circular and
piece of rock and staring at the sky. He seemed impatient,
“We’ve got to hold on tight,” Ned said, “and screw the nuts down
vessels named the Solway, the Isis, the Paramatta, the Hungarian, the
“dangerous group” associated with the French global navigator
Nothing else until the moment when, through a rift in the clouds, I
After I monitored the operation’s progress, double-checking it with
A second well-polished stone removed a tasty ringdove leg from
water heat up at the surface, sink into the depths, reach maximum
This question baffled me, since Commander Farragut would certainly
catch these cod by the thousands. They’re eaten in prodigious
each step to curb the pounding of my heart.
at his feet.
Supervising our work, working himself, Captain Nemo passed near me
THE MEDITERRANEAN, your ideal blue sea: to Greeks simply “the sea,” to
contrivance. The last surviving man on the Nautilus will throw this
“What you believe to be red meat, professor, is nothing other than
“Quiet!” Commander Farragut said. “Helm hard to leeward! Reverse
officers, mates, sailors, cabin boys, down to engineers leaving their
electric lamp was so constructed as to yield its maximum illuminating
moderate height, their sides slanting and partly inset with heavy
sea. Under ordinary conditions, such readings are obtained using some
We sat down at the table. Our meal proceeded pretty much in silence. I
Then, just as he was about to strike, the cetacean would steal off
operation. At dinner the same day, my steward served me some slices of
the first glimmers of daylight, it resumed its cannonade. The time
“My helmsman is stationed behind the windows of a pilothouse, which
and the new Astrolabe couldn’t compare with the Nautilus, a quiet work
feasible, assuming Ned Land managed to seize the skiff without the
The terrain consisted mostly of thick slime mixed with petrified
changed into overhangs, and our climb into a circular stroll. At this
the seafloor by the thousands: concentric comb shells, hammer shells,
unable to say. But when I regained consciousness, I was lying in a
shipping 100 metric tons of water. So I can descend to considerable
within sight of the coasts of Europe.”
neighbors, the Caspian Sea and the Dead Sea, whose levels lower only
gradually unrolled this third cable, the electricians observed on
And Ned Land reentered his cabin, “to keep from doing something
severed all ties with the shore.”
latitudes.
sorry he hadn’t gone along. But I hoped an opportunity would arise for
“Yes,” the captain replied coolly, “the Antarctic pole, that unknown
French, American, or Russian, it would surely welcome us aboard if we
from my grasp a spyglass poised to scour the horizon, and the fatal
exclusively marine quadruped. One and a half meters long, this otter
“No,” I told Conseil, “that’s no mermaid, it’s an unusual creature of
The poor ship then sank more swiftly. Its mastheads appeared, laden
representative of France in this mysterious alliance, obviously made
I heard its teeth grind on sheet iron, and the dugong disappeared,
walls and tried to probe their thickness. I couldn’t help smiling. Our
Nautilus didn’t stay idle, and cruising along the coast, it advanced
shipowners, captains of vessels, skippers, and master mariners from
southwestern tip of the Hispanic peninsula. The wind was blowing a
The Ruhmkorff lamp hanging from my belt, my rifle in hand, I was ready
the world, but I admit that the nationality of these two strangers is
round spots of deep blue encircled in black, its hide quite smooth and
point in our stroll, but I was mistaken; and instead of heading back
“In sight of land. I saw it through the mists just this morning,
spines have vertebrae made of bone; and cartilaginous fish, in other
eels three to four meters long that were tricked out in green, blue,
mineral, vegetable, and animal kingdoms. Medicine to the ancients,
afloat, the crew towed it, leading it right above the immense trench
good while. But how sad, despairing, and irresolute he must have felt,
I kept quiet, with good reason. What was the use of debating such a
Sierra Leone on the coast of Africa. Abreast of the West Indies, this
gamut of reds, from the pallor of pink to the glow of ruby. I couldn’t
you now honor one of the binding agreements between us.”
Half a mile farther on, the ground was completely riddled with penguin
crossing his arms.
which is composed exclusively of seashells rich in limestone or
Compagnie Nationale and the Shannon from the Royal Mail line, running
“Professor Aronnax,” the Canadian replied, “your arguments are rotten
out of the east rippled the surface of the water. Free of all mist,
substructures, zoophytes, algae, and crustaceans with enormous
“By jumping down the hatches you’re about to open.”
encounter that would be great fun! That’s one big animal! Look how
“Well, professor, are you pleased with this Red Sea? Have you seen
reigning on board. I cocked an ear and listened. Would a sudden
that he was in the grip of his monomania.
day some error in perception, or the optical illusions of some sailor
observe those Mediterranean fish whose powerful fins kept pace for a
Cyclades Islands. A bold diver! Water is his true element, and he
or hear. I had lost all sense of time. My muscles had no power to
of such character-judging anatomists as Gratiolet or Engel could have
memories of antiquity. This was the remora, which travels attached to
menu.”
times during that day of January 19. The chief officer would then
plains.
of the ocean. Having fished in the Arctic seas, Ned Land was already
“Yes, sir, and that’s the subject on which I wanted to confer with
For four days until February 3, the Nautilus inspected the Gulf of
to this day, and will be until my last breath, a native of that same
What a scene! Seized by the tentacle and glued to its suckers, the
“No one will force you, Mr. Land,” Captain Nemo said.
successive layers of lava, who knows whether the peaks of these
in the existence of some lower current that carries the
to press charges against anyone holding him in illegal custody,
their strokes vigorously catch the water, and they always waited ten
are known by the name seed pearls; they’re priced by the measuring cup
“I agree with our friend Ned,” Conseil said, “and I’m waiting to hear
“And you, my gallant Conseil, you suffered a great deal.”
meters high. Captain Nemo then bored into the lower surface. There we
condition, and it must have gone under only a few hours before. The
too much about the stroke of fate that has brought us together. Among
phrase, “the Nautilus has run aground at a moment when the sea is
In essence, it was precisely March 20. Tomorrow, the 21st, was the day
under, or brought them back to the upper level of the waters,
leaves the Bay of Bengal, crosses the Strait of Malacca, goes up the
“So far you’ve visited the ocean depths only by day and under
local flora was represented by fine floating algae: sea tangle, and
no longer envisioned a different lifestyle on the surface of the
large number of starfish unique to these climes, plus some feather
is azure-hued Proteus . . . ” Ed.
“Finally! It’s light enough to see!” Ned Land exclaimed, knife in
But I catch myself following in the Canadian’s footsteps. Look at
Lincoln.
Live in the heart of the seas! Here alone lies independence! Here I
the effects of this light through these translucent sheets of water,
angles: in the domain of marine biology, he gives us thumbnail
revive himself, basking in historical memories, reliving that bygone
faithful record of this inconceivable expedition into an element now
hatch and ran to look for the captain. A few moments later, the two of
with tremendous speed, moving by means of their locomotive tubes,
through. I even bought a pearl necklace for my fiancée, Kate Tender,
“Underground, professor.”
balance. Then, driven by its powerful propeller, it attacked this ice
seemed to have changed on board.
the monster hadn’t appeared, our helmsman would give three turns of
a sharp nip in the air. Ice floes were increasing over the open
increased when they glided over the metal hull of our submersible. In
to be deep in thought, no doubt trying to calculate how many
the slightest token of that sympathy that arises at the sight of
outlined three miles to the south. A torrent had carried us from one
those!”
The ground rose appreciably as it moved away from the sand flats by
many inspections, I told the captain, “It’s working.”
it with him. But this rope measured no more than about ten fathoms,
fishing?”
ferreted them out tirelessly, and I’ve been able to gather some
“Captain Nemo,” I told my host, who had just stretched out on a couch,
constant surveillance by rival powers.
with no ironwork to tempt the natives’ avarice.
“How many men do you think are on board the Nautilus?”
track of them—still separated me from the moment I was to rejoin Ned
that freedom, moreover totally related to it, I’ll lay on you just one
air, we went below once more.
electric light from our beacon. Stirred up by our footsteps, the
matter some 37,657,000 square miles, hence 12,916,000,000 hectares.
British government built fortifications to strengthen Aden’s
give me away. It took me five minutes to reach the door at the far
meters, in other words, the lowermost limit at which coral can begin
rejoined Ned Land and Conseil. I informed them of Captain Nemo’s
“I’ll make a fermented batter from its pulp that’ll keep indefinitely
at which point that air has become charged with a nearly equal amount
What rage then drove us against these monsters! We lost all
“Honestly,” he said, “I’m not sorry about this voyage under the
THIS DREADFUL SCENE on April 20 none of us will ever be able to
“Certainly, Conseil. But tell me, haven’t you finished classifying
“Head for the skiff!” I said, moving toward the sea.
Just then I was on the platform. Observing the situation for some
that exist along the coasts of New Caledonia and several of the
I’ll mention, just for the record: an elegant royal hammer shell from
me to the afterdeck, where I stood in the presence of a smart-looking
electric log gave our speed as fifteen miles per hour.
“Tit for tat, captain,” Ned Land replied. “I owed it to you.”
over these unexplored depths. The darkness in the lounge enhanced the
and the principle of their existence lies in the water that sustains
animals. But I’ll bet you don’t know how they’re classified.”
fired. The animal dropped, electrocuted, and its descent brought it
our enthusiasm for the sea’s wonders. He would risk anything just to
too long, if they really had good intentions toward us.
three places in our longboat: one for fruit, another for vegetables,
Europeans and knew their ships. But this long, iron cylinder lying in
technology bears them out triumphantly.
Georgia. But d’Entrecasteaux was unaware of this news—which seemed a
2. The Pros and Cons
Nautilus could break free. For an instant I was gripped by despair. My
that Lieutenant Parker, aboard the American frigate Congress, was
wheelhouse?”
During the magnificent evening of June 25—in other words, three weeks
from events.
don’t forget my old harpooning trade?”
butterfish genus, whose oval bodies are very flat, I observed several
Egyptians ranked among their sacred animals, lauding them in religious
them.
Nautilus’s hull could run afoul of some submerged block of ice. So I
this whole seafloor is still under construction by plutonic
attached under the pectorals and hang directly from the shoulder
“That’s the floating signal light of Suez,” he went on. “It won’t be
once, just as the Indian was kneeling on the seafloor, I saw him make
science has baptized with its most delightful names.
clear waters, which exhibited a profusion of shells, zoophytes, and
being educated; they make good pets, and together with certain other
carried on his back a Rouquayrol device that the air tanks had
To mark that miraculous sequel, the sea turned a red without equal.
captain did not stir.
carapace no longer protected its planking.
is difficult to understand for anyone who has never seen light beams
sheet-iron cylinder seemed deserted. Our provisions loaded on board, I
are now dead for me. In my eyes, your modern artists are already as
“Yes, professor,” Captain Nemo replied with genuine excitement, “and I
the caked heights of an acropolis along with the fluid forms of a
simply because of their difference in level. So I caught a large
gravity, and the whole flotilla disappeared under the waves. It was
that much pressure without being crushed!”
Captain Nemo was right. I was outdoing him in daring! It was I who was
that make up the ocean’s true breathing. I’ve seen a molecule of salt
A few minutes before nine o’clock, I glued my ear to the captain’s
perhaps!”
would he resort to violence in order to be rid of us, or would he drop
climates of Europe would undergo disturbances whose consequences are
rushed under the mountain, and the volcano would still be a
temperament like the Canadian’s, what he might think, attempt,
a decimeter wide and furnished on the outside with creases that
“I’m saying that just as I jumped overboard, I heard the men at the
hunt a man-eater or two. It’s a fascinating sport. So, professor, I’ll
could just get to it.
Ned Land had a way of pronouncing the word “snap” that sent chills
centuries millennia?
“With master’s permission, I’ll make an observation to him,” Conseil
marketplace, subtly luminous jellyfish of the species Pelagia
Among the fish that the Nautilus startled on its way, I’ll mention a
tightness of its rivets; and due to the perfect union of its
ironwork and copper undersides. Among these vessels, how many went
spot. I realized that he was standing up. I even got a glimpse of him
“This fanciful fellow claims the sea was given its name after the
“just as a person can be both gluttonous and honorable. The one
Then, dropping Ned and turning to the battleship, whose shells were
see them, or didn’t want to see them. They carried out certain
and sped swiftly.
turned to us.
Englishman Balleny discovered the Sabrina Coast at the edge of the
barely unfolded it when he was felled by an iron fist, and despite his
The next day, February 14, I decided to spend a few hours studying the
trusted, but here’s what a few of them relate. Inside the corpse of
bottom of this. Your Nemo’s veering away from shore and heading up
whose depth would have made me recoil had I been in the midst of
none at all, depending on the subgenus to which they belong. The
“Go on! Go on!” I told him.
has to finish. That’s my feeling.”
in abeyance. But on February 3, 1866, a new islet named George Island
behalf.
I took the cigar offered me, whose shape recalled those from Cuba; but
versions have often been heavily abridged, this new translation is
that anchor certain seashells; as the ancients were wont to do, it was
12, sailed along its reefs until the 14th, and only on the 20th
other words, that dappled, shimmering glow that makes them so
tufts of virginal genus Oculina formerly known by the name “white
silver below, would have made one of those wonderful fur pieces so
and however much I wanted to clear this wall, I had to stop. Here
saying:
Instead of continuing north, the Nautilus took an easterly heading, as
an act of charity. Yet who knows if it would be well received? Usually
the world, and when its isthmus has been cut through, it will
in our stormglass decomposed under the influence of the electricity
The shark bellowed, so to speak. Blood was pouring into the waves from
outside attack, transforming it into a sacred ark no profane hand
“Not yet. I haven’t let the Nautilus pull too near the coast, and
equipment perfected by your science and your imagination.” Thus
overhead. The surface of the water was crisscrossed by a floating
observations of Louis-Isidore Duperrey, in longitude 135 degrees and
unlucky place for England’s Captain Dillon, who was the first to shed
since I had no hope of studying these zoophytes in the seaports of the
the dark, and I must limit my pen, as it were, to taking dictation
off a continuous whitish light. Thus provided for, I breathe and I
voice slowly say:
because it navigates the watery deep all by itself; no storms to
elude the thrusts of his harpoon.
stayed at a much higher degree. Every maneuver was accomplished with
“My friends,” I replied, signaling them to enter, “you’re in neither
excellent.”
various species of alcyonarian coral, sea urchins, hammer shells,
used among themselves only that bizarre dialect whose origin I
“What did you see?”
had entertained after our interview with the ship’s commander were
obvious that we would never catch up with it.
three feet long, the body very slender, the skin a smooth silver
spotted a few savages who looked extremely startled at our
under these circumstances!”
of his condition?”
At 9:15 when our boat returned to the surface, I climbed onto the
were stony masses buried beneath carpets of axidia and sea anemone,
Conseil’s cabin, I summoned my two companions, who instantly followed
stable, barely faltered and would help me up, saying:
By then the ironclad was no more than three miles off. Despite its
buffeted by this enormously heavy sea. After inhaling a few breaths of
Meanwhile, turning, the Nautilus made a circle around the sinking
It was a delightful animal whose discovery, according to the ancients,
“Oh, it’s nothing really! A route slightly less direct, that’s
speak human dialects. At present they were cackling in chorus with
Just now we can’t even dream of returning to France. Travel between
with ribbons, which contrasted with the dark color of their fins; fish
wonderment! If only I had known, like Captain Nemo and his companion,
skiff. The longboat’s coxswain took the tiller; his four companions
feet from the surface. Separating us from the open air was a mere
“I prefer my harpoon,” the Canadian answered.
French, because I made several remarks in a loud voice that were bound
greater activity; our propeller did forty-three revolutions per
“Now we know,” Ned said, “that we can’t expect a thing from this
opening below the surface of the ocean, the opening that serves as a
at best. But to the south there is a deep, suddenly occurring
like a long, blackish object on the surface of the water.”
had negotiated a charter whereby they were to receive all merchandise
In the maritime world and in the realm of geographic exploration,
cemented together, and our feet kept skidding on glassy trachyte, made
blame itself. Never had the crew of an American naval craft shown more
He trembled, and turning around:
locks, watch springs, etc.) are designed to be used in a right-to-left
The seafloor kept sinking, and its significantly steeper slope took us
sights, it would take the pen of our most famous poet, Victor Hugo,
while in the Nautilus’s waters. We stayed on watch before the lounge
accurate to say that we sat in the lounge as if we were riding in a
sure. It’s dark enough for one. Luckily my Bowie knife hasn’t left me,
atmospheres at 32,000 feet, that is, at about two and a half vertical
obstructed by an incalculable number of islands, islets, breakers, and
next to the beacon, where we were less exposed to the damp spray from
this whole sturdy mechanism would surely have given way, if, as its
The Indian Ocean
without equaling their strength, and are encountered in every sea; in
anything to know his thoughts, to share them, understand them!
Europe or America a pearl worth millions, it would make the story of
“Professor,” he said, “listen carefully. This piece of history
“Ned! Oh horrors!” Conseil exclaimed.
role I only partly understand; but I still catch glimpses of other
“If master will authorize me, I’ll tell the whole business in German.”
painters. In the distance is a mountainous horizon, a wondrously
shape. Either they stick to the oyster’s shell, or they become
begins in this world must inevitably come to an end.”
it stood on end, the three of us along with it!
For two hours our fishing proceeded energetically but without bringing
Indian shore, professor, there are roads and railways, English,
things moving around. My blood would curdle as I watched some enormous
flight, however evasive its trajectory (even up and over the
abandon with which I place my trust in this Nautilus, since I’m its
tentacles, and starfish that spangled the sand, including veinlike
January 23, 1827, accompanied by a French deputy.
the desired total of 1,356.48 metric tons. Clear?”
Captain Nemo stopped. I admit it: I still couldn’t see how this piece
I was hard pressed by Ned Land’s common sense, and I felt myself
passing like phantoms in the fiery waters. Some were struck by
emerged in the midst of sulfurous steam near Nea Kameni and was fused
Suddenly I let out a yell. There had been a collision, but it was
During those nineteen days just mentioned, no unique incidents
The engineers then proceeded to inspect the Scotia, which had been put
although his catalog is a little dry, I wouldn’t want to wrong the
supplied by the biggest mollusk in the class Acephala, measured about
of the cooking. Arriving under the stoves, wires transmitted to
other victim of that collision suffered by our ship? Or was it one of
orders to make for the Gulf of Mannar, and we’ll arrive there late
lounge’s canted corners, led me back down the ship’s gangways. He took
put it to work?”
tough, they’re often used as mooring lines for ships. Another weed,
head, and I turned to Captain Nemo.
branches, but it changed little by little near four o’clock in the
“That’s the standard equipment for a diving suit,” I said.
month, after a quick crossing marked by no incident, we raised the
“About 40,000 to 50,000. It’s even said that in 1814, when the English
the skeletons of animals from the age of fable, animals that used to
But it was eight o’clock the next day when I returned to the lounge. I
From the daily notes kept by Mr. Conseil, I also retrieve certain fish
I sat up.
“Surely, but as we move ahead to the far end of this gulf, you’ll note
“I’ve no idea,” Ned replied.
“Indeed,” Conseil said. “But will master now tell us how one goes
this law of physics discovered by Archimedes, I did just fine. I was
I saw the Island of Hawaii two miles to leeward, the largest of the
Now then, this second arm—more accurately, a collar—forms a ring of
versed in its practical application, and I doubt that he could tell a
equal to Mr. Land’s harpoon, I imagine.”
tilled soil on its outskirts, the various mountain chains running
What ship was this? Why had the Nautilus come to visit its grave? Was
we were in your own country’s seas, you didn’t say a word. Now that
The raging sea was swept with huge tattered clouds drenched by the
judgment on me, sir. Fate has shown you what you weren’t meant to
and tools of Egyptian origin.”
venturing far from their High Arctic seas.
unknown to me. They were good, I admit, but with a peculiar flavor to
“We agreed to wait for the right circumstances,” Ned Land went
“Well, sir, let them come aboard. I see no reason to prevent
change! You see only impediments and obstacles! I promise you, not
thorax are usually fused, whose cheek-and-mouth mechanism is made up
incalculable number, among which I recognized all nine species that
Fiji Islands, where savages slaughtered sailors from the Union, as
“Here, professor, I need to give you some background information,”
after sailor heaved insults at the monster, which couldn’t be bothered
lightning.
de La Pérouse’s shipwreck.
musical trance.
crew, allied body and soul with Captain Nemo and likewise fleeing from
mistaken. Tipsy from that potent juice, our bird of paradise had been
kingdom until 1694, by Peysonnel of Marseilles.
periwinkles, violet snails, cineraira snails, rock borers, ear shells,
documented by the annals engraved on the sacred walls of its
by this point observing, studying, and classifying were out of the
nodules, it sports hideously irregular horns; its body and tail are
trail. Several times we got within a few fathoms of it, and the
man resigned to the worst.
available opportunity, this monster that has swallowed us will return
The operation proceeded apace. Yet there was one hitch. As they
supplementary ballast tanks in order to lighten your boat and rise to
So saying, he leaped lightly onto the sand. His heart must have been
later, Captain Cook in 1774, Rear Admiral d’Entrecasteaux in 1793, and
him, but his shot went off and shattered a bracelet of amulets
Dumoulin and Sublieutenant (now Admiral) Coupvent-Desbois, who were
instant.
brightness outside, and we stared as if this clear glass were the
I’ll also mention that the Canadian, at the end of his strength and
these people have a language all to themselves, a language they’ve
Dutchmen, emboldening them against the ocean’s perils, and leading
surface of the waves.
which had proved so ill-fated for Captain Dumont d’Urville. It went
I continued to observe this phenomenon. For several hours the
prehistoric times! I was walking in the very place where
watertight bulkheads and were shut hermetically by means of
questioned each other, and more directly than if our thoughts had been
unpredictable irregularity in the seafloor would force the Nautilus to
“Ah, professor,” he said in an affable tone, “I’ve been looking for
from Cape Clear, and after three days of delay that filled Liverpool
person.”
“It took me a good while to decide,” the commander went on. “Nothing
over!”
which, in this darkness, came off as positively dazzling. This effect
The Red Sea: that great lake so famous in biblical traditions, seldom
“May God be with us!” I replied.
“And will we see your companions at work?”
connecting the Red Sea with the Mediterranean, but they never dreamed
peninsula.
I stared at the last rays wreathing this peak, while shadows were
skeptical?”
feelings, since he doesn’t want us to call them cannibals—if these
map displayed on the table, and I put my finger on the very spot where
opinion: new observations taken by the transatlantic liner Pereire,
in a vacuum!
Suez, I had to be content with observing them in the waters of the Red
“Sir,” the commander said, “are you up to pressure?”
bands, there were classified and labeled the most valuable marine
“I don’t know,” I replied.
ice, which keeps the air extremely damp. How many ships have perished
softest eelgrass. Your quill pen will be whalebone, your ink a juice
wormfish drifting like thin seaweed, sea robins that poets call
insured our breakfast. He brought down a white pigeon and a ringdove,
intense hunger. What kept my stomach in such a good mood I’m unable to
our stay on that islet, which if I could have, I’d have blown up.”
waves. And, contrary to custom, it executed such a maneuver several
was already starting to fall into that promised state of stunned
As I said, this underwater crater spewed lava, but not flames. Flames
living in a habitat designed for cetaceans and other denizens of the
traveling at a speed of 13.43 knots under the thrust of its
hole two meters in width on the steamer’s underside. Such a leak could
“If master’s legs would kindly adopt a wider stance, master will keep
“But does this mean the old boy goes ashore?” Ned Land went on.
with teeth, from a viewpoint less than scientific—more as a victim
threatened to raise their premium rates—were unanimous on this point.
spells on watch, he pretended that he never even looked at the surface
temperatures they experience; but I preferred to use a more practical
True, today’s scientists know a few things he didn’t: the South Pole
“After the South Pole, does our captain want to tackle the North Pole,
door open. I took a few steps inside. Still the same austere, monastic
surrounds me but doesn’t penetrate me.”
to forty fathoms. Under the green shade of some tropical evergreens, I
quantities, and without the astonishing fertility of these fish, the
Captain Nemo, Conseil, Ned Land, and I found seats in the stern of the
picks and mattocks were too slow to deal with the ice layer still
to make ourselves understood.
to the action by developing three recurring motifs: the deepening
take my eyes off these marine wonders, when I was suddenly jolted by
couldn’t change. “It’s one more danger, but I don’t know any way of
a door, went along the upper gangways, and arrived at the wheelhouse,
point in dampening the energy they were putting into our arduous
This inexplicable individual acted like a mathematics professor
I couldn’t even tell whether their contents belonged to the vegetable
with the captain.
gravity, each chunk took wing, as it were, to the roof of the tunnel,
separated it from us.
respiratory organs from any parching contact with the air and can live
diver. It was a shark of huge size, moving in diagonally, eyes ablaze,
loaded with water, and the full electric heat of our batteries was
fisheries bring in the returns they once did. Similarly, the Central
“I haven’t the foggiest notion, Professor Aronnax.”
2,700. A major sea nearly unknown to the ancients, except perhaps the
cutting or perforating instrument rather than a blunt one. This
society’s laws! Among all the surprises the future had in store for
Calm of eye, cool of feature, an old gray-bearded gunner—I can see him
“Captain,” I replied, “I’m all praise for this idea you’re putting
“Very likely, Professor Aronnax, because since 1866 eight little lava
pressure gauge. It marked a depth of sixty feet, a depth beyond the
few words in their incomprehensible dialect.
“Why, the freedom to come, go, see, and even closely observe
reviewed my narrative. I read it to Conseil and the Canadian. They
40,000 geographic leagues. It’s located between latitude 0 degrees 19’
with spots of gold sparkling in the dark eddies of the waves. Around
Canadian to try again with a greater chance of success.
shipwreck caught in the act, as if it had been photographed in its
was broad daylight?
I’ll use the one for Paris.”
I finally understood! This clearing was a cemetery, this hole a grave,
band that duplicated our every movement and gesture; in short, a
whales don’t prey on their whalebone cousins. This notwithstanding,
among which we noted the islands of Viti Levu, Vanua Levu, and Kadavu.
don’t see how you can prevent them from entering.”
precision that enraptured Conseil: “icebergs,” or mountains; “ice
“Indeed,” I replied, “here you’re in perfect safety, Captain Nemo. Who
about his life in its last seconds, imagine what his final thoughts
These polyparies were sticking to rocks, shells of mollusks, and even
mother-of-pearl; green parrot shells from the seas of China; the
hospitals. I was in practice for several years before joining the
platform, and returned to me:
underwater chart. Do you understand now that I’m rich to the tune of
“You mean you can control this heat?”
hull tremble down to its rivets, and we sped northward.
now buoying the ship, it was a lake completely encircled by an inner
some dry leaves, set them on fire with a spark from his tinderbox, and
followed suit. By turning a switch, I established contact between the
only picks desert islands!”
“You observe,” Captain Nemo told me, “that I use Bunsen cells, not
the engineer has more confidence in a craft than the builder, and the
up in just a few hours.
invited him to dip his hands into its current.
than fish eaters, obeying the tiniest signals from their females like
I was stretched out on the seafloor directly beneath some bushes of
been chopped off. Brandishing its victim like a feather, one lone
full size piano-organ, which occupied one of the wall panels in this
fluid could have been restored to us. I had thought it all out, but to
wingspans, birds aptly dubbed “vultures of the ocean,” also gigantic
had halted its upward movement. In fact, it soon would have hit the
sea, these hours would surely have seemed long and monotonous; but my
returns to the Bay of Biscay and the Azores; the other washes the
The Ice Bank
The commander of the new Astrolabe then had a monument erected under a
maneuvered.”
us to the world inhabited by our own kind.”
“What! You know German?” I exclaimed.
There sponges grew in every shape, globular, stalklike, leaflike,
“You see, my friend, it’s an issue of the monster, the notorious
Nautilus, our electric glow was being generated in the very heart of
Ross had found the craters of Mt. Erebus and Mt. Terror in fully
The chief officer kept lifting his spyglass and stubbornly examining
“Ah, what a splendid death for a seaman!” Captain Nemo then said. “A
fisherman. You’ve caught a large number of these fascinating
that live by the millions in one droplet of water, 800,000 of which
“Because in those days their tails moved side to side, like those on
long before we return in our tracks.”
greater violence. We were floating in the midst of gigantic bodies,
trees, aloes, cactus, and maritime pine trees, perfumed with the scent
lead, I was managing with only the greatest difficulty. Conseil
“Are we at the pole?” I asked the captain, my heart pounding.
out of those 3,000 ships whose losses are recorded annually at the
origin. The entire horizon was hidden behind a curtain of wonderful
waves for entire days. The sea was nearly deserted. A few sailing
“As master thinks best,” Conseil replied placidly.
I did a quick pencil calculation.
great difficulty deciding. Some extremely inconvenient circumstances
more widely scattered and were fixed on the chart with the greatest
natives’ huts. This Land of Fire forms a huge cluster of islands over
of several pairs of appendages, and whose thorax has four, five, or
and in this frame of mind, continually excited by the series of
and I were ready to go with him.
THE PART OF THE planet earth that the seas occupy has been assessed at
the nets left in our wake during the night. These seamen obviously
CHAPTER 10
picked up by the Abraham Lincoln’s longboats, we had to take steps to
ocean, the sun astonished me with its power. The solar rays easily
and England had signed a treaty of alliance at The Hague, aiming to
a lamp shining through the biconvex lenses of a world-class
greenest fisherman in the business.
secret, and sheltered against winds from any direction! Along the
centuries to discover the mechanical power of steam! Who knows whether
fish from Surinam, etc.
pale red slabs of bone, then finally the grenadier, living at a depth
misfortune, ultimately costing the lives of Rear Admiral
on our excursions ashore and on our hunting, but seemed not to
catching it; to catch it called for harpooning it—which was Ned Land’s
wouldn’t make sense.”
propeller blades, parts of engines, cracked cylinders, staved-in
*Spanish: “ospreys.” Ed.
museum. Perhaps, following the examples of oyster farmers in China and
I thought about how this marvelous electric force not only gave
idea of taking revenge on us, a notion it would soon have cause to
visibly thickened. Obviously they would come together before the
it. We’ll stick ourselves inside, undo the bolts, and rise to the
“We’re overhauling it!” the Canadian would shout.
you, I’d have no personal interest in ever seeing you again. I could
beneath the undulating surface of the Ice Bank. But the Nautilus sank
the liquid surface, would ricochet and vanish into the sea at
clapped his hands, but the Canadian shrugged his shoulders.
schools of porpoise that held contests of speed with the Nautilus. But
companionway or the crew’s quarters. I assumed that Captain Nemo was
“Yes, professor,” he answered me. “I studied in London, Paris, and New
terms and conducted himself like a true gentleman.”
cetacean!
excellent, even better than veal if not beef.
ceiling of the waters like thin, black, paper cutouts. Picture a
this company owned twelve ships, eight with paddle wheels and four
*Latin: “There in King Neptune’s domain by Karpathos, his spokesman /
“I’m with you.”
It was an old hand at the Pacific, the English adventurer Captain
its socket and launched to sea. Six rowers sat on the thwarts, and the
four-kilometer leagues) per hour. Needless to say, Ned Land had to
of treading on the solid parts of our planet?”
Ned Land didn’t reply. His pursed lips and frowning brow indicated
darkness. We had to wait for daylight to find some way of getting
tail—in my longboat, needless to say. My companions and I were
fifteen meters down. No. The upper strata were too violently
successively from bluish gray to reddish brown.
were spurring each other on. The Nautilus, sometimes lying on its
THE NAUTILUS resumed its unruffled southbound heading. It went along
board. But I didn’t suffer very much, although Captain Nemo hadn’t yet
degrees west. It consists of a number of islands, islets, and reefs,
fashions the open sea at the pole.
By evening there was still no improvement in our situation. The ice
fish. The days passed quickly, and I no longer kept track of
unable to get beyond 62 degrees. That same year a humble seal
complicated noise made up of the roar of crashing breakers, the howl
indicated that it was running southward at a speed of twenty miles per
facing extinction.
although it could neither sink nor split open, it was in serious
navigating in the midst of milky white waves. As far as the eye could
“What’s that, sir?”
seventy-four cannons and was launched in 1762. On August 13, 1778,
minnows flitted from branch to branch like a swarm of hummingbirds,
CAPTAIN NEMO,
“I’m all attention, captain.”
back. “You never allow yourself any displays of bile or attacks of
“I’m of master’s opinion,” Conseil said.
one open-sea forest. I immediately recognized the wondrous region in
crustacean, which a swing of the rifle butt quickly brought down, and
scientists! Pertinent to this, I’ll ask you if the Nautilus’s running
cavern, and before deciding if it was the work of nature or humankind,
it to his boat, served to lower him more quickly to the ocean
higher. But since salt water freezes only at -2 degrees, I was finally
Conseil my friend, we’re never going back to that world!”
the forts to salutes from their biggest cannons. The Abraham Lincoln
advantage of it on several occasions. Without it, I wouldn’t have
second flexes southward at the level of the Azores; then it hits the
appendage. He gasped, he choked, he yelled: “Help! Help!” These words,
“Indeed,” I said. “But didn’t he give you any details on—”
soldier with his saber; in another, finally, a horse with its
valuable species that patronizes all waters fresh or salt, equally at
escape the cold, these marine mammals remain as sole lords of the
cubic meters of water rushed in, increasing the Nautilus’s weight by
aloes with long, sad, sickly leaves. But between these lava flows I
For Ned Land, as well as for every navigator before us, I knew that
waters there stretched the bank of shellfish, an inexhaustible field
condition had intensified this phenomenon? Perhaps a storm had been
commander’s authority aboard his vessel, not one gesture gave away the
other devilfish are quite large, though still smaller than
I stayed in my stateroom. I wanted to avoid the captain, to hide from
nets in our wake, and I pull them up ready to burst. Sometimes I go
“Gladly, Professor Aronnax.”
number of gills; that the family Dibranchiata includes three genera,
“The deepest parts of the ocean are totally unknown to us,” admits
also known by the name sea hares, other sea hares from the genus
“This shell,” I said, displaying the subject of my triumph.
call freedom is perhaps less painful than you think!”
scientific, and this is an excerpt from the well-padded article I
me to the bow, and there I found not just a cabin but an elegant
It was during the night of December 9-10 that the Nautilus encountered
handwriting of King Louis XVI!
awoke, it seemed as if the sun were settling toward the
our voyage of exploration under the waters.”
“Yes,” I replied, “and nobody would blame you!”
their tentacles dangle in the drift. I wanted to preserve a few
by the minute. Little by little, I heard those aforesaid cusswords
electric light. With my hand I tried to curb the pounding of my heart.
“Pardon me, sir,” I went on, “but that’s merely the freedom that every
from salt water and with which I compose my electric cells.”
places in the barrel of the rifle. As soon as one shot had been fired,
we’ll begin our stroll.”
“Well, my friend, someday the earth will be just such a cold
breeze, spreading placidly around the Nautilus’s side plates.
aren’t moving.”
Accident or Incident?
“We already have, professor.”
so profoundly changed, now resumed its usual calm. He addressed a few
stateroom, very moved by this scene. All day long I was aquiver with
perfect balance, they neutralize each other and allow you to tolerate
undulating line that makes up the background of this landscape. The
bulkiness of my clothes, footwear, and air tank, nor the weight of the
Vanikoro, Dumont d’Urville dropped anchor before Hobart. There he
by one, we are forced, every other supposition having been refuted, to
of squid, unusual mollusks that are near neighbors of the
to Ceylon’s magnificent pearl fisheries. He did so in the most cordial
“The weather is clearing a bit,” he told me. “I have high hopes. After
animal.
suck the atoms from the air by the lungful, and it was the breeze, the
they set snares on the tops of the tall trees that the bird of
mountain’s crust. Noises from deep underneath, clearly transmitted by
fighter who plunged beneath the waves to wage a unique form of
“Yes. It’s a purplish, mucilaginous substance produced by those tiny
“And is master familiar with how the islanders go about it?”
right off, I was struck by an effect unique to this medium.
One of our nets had hauled up a type of very flat ray that weighed
sea near India, which soundings of 13,000 meters have been unable to
Commander Farragut, to my thinking, had made a wise move in hiring on
that $2,000.00!”
“So,” Conseil asked, “you have everything you need, Ned my friend?”
vein, “the honorable Pierre Aronnax, Professor at the Paris Museum,”
“Even less likely, Ned. The devilfish is merely a mollusk, and even
The French title of this novel is Vingt mille lieues sous les
Finally, at five o’clock in the afternoon, laden with all our
feasible. But I’ve tapped none of these land-based metals, and I
lower countercurrent, the only present-day proof of its existence
whales or sperm whales, and its fins look like sawed-off limbs.”
sea; for Orientals it’s a drop of solidified dew; for the ladies it’s
Meanwhile, ignoring all these fine specimens of Papuan flora, the
strolled up and down, all aquiver. Then his nerves grew calmer, his
new concentric layers. The captain alone was familiar with the cave
doubling the Cape of Good Hope?”
- MILLIGRAM Roughly 1/28,000 of an ounce
“What about them?” Captain Nemo replied, with a light shrug of his
have been the finish of Captain Nemo’s submersible.
“Mr. Naturalist,” the Canadian replied in all seriousness, “when it
I’ve stowed some food and flasks of water inside.”
passageway, and may Heaven grant it really does take us to the
“Did I say sharks?” I exclaimed hastily. “I meant 150 pearls. Sharks
swiftly toward the dugong, which by then was floating two miles from
I stared in my turn and couldn’t keep back a movement of
throats, three cheers burst forth in succession. Thousands of
the land of sensible people.”
“Address away, Professor Aronnax, and if I’m able to answer, I will.”
early. Fishermen gather in the Gulf of Mannar only during the month of
to every level. But on April 11 it rose suddenly, and the shore
“My own book?”
the beacon housing were withdrawn into the hull until they lay exactly
gruesome forebodings. That night I slept poorly, and between my fitful
course just a few meters above the ocean floor. It was an enjoyable
profound silence reigned over the deck. We were not 100 feet from the
in Nebraska, I arrived in New York laden with valuable collections
melodious singers, that their voices in unison put on concerts
every clime. A type of ray from the genus Oxyrhynchus, five feet wide,
twilight, a midpoint between day and night. But we could see well
Nautilus, disturbed by the fall of a heavy object. Soon after, an
in the salty waters next to the Nile Delta. Near them some
couldn’t see even Captain Nemo. However, looking at the zenith
high mountains rose in the distance. I even thought I glimpsed
*Latin: “troubled dreams.” Ed.
tales took on the form of an epic poem, and I felt I was hearing some
isosceles triangle in its upper jaw.
lounge were open, and since the Nautilus’s beacon was off, a hazy
the ship, which stayed to his leeward five or six miles off. He was
He fell silent for some moments, then he said:
“We’re floating on its surface, Ned my friend.”
density is 7.8 times that of water. The first hull has a thickness of
salvation might be available to us.
Just then the pressure gauge indicated we were no more than twenty
northernmost seas?”
Meanwhile I was astonished at the frigate’s maneuvers. It was fleeing,
Anyone consulting Conseil would soon learn from the gallant lad that
“Under it!” I exclaimed.
backward-curving rows, fish commonly known by the name carpet shark;
biconvex glass, one reserved for the helmsman steering the Nautilus,
period.
effort to get away.
yeoman service as hunting dogs for fishermen.
distinguish the indistinct forms of palaces and temples, now arrayed
the waters, the ship’s beacon would surely facilitate our return on
Meanwhile I was examining this unusual bird. Conseil was not
underlying chasm, as the Dutchman Jansen so aptly put it; but below
the ballast tanks completely.”
But some preliminary vibrations could soon be felt over the boat’s
was a sonorous, harmonious, flexible dialect whose vowels seemed to
There was nothing to be seen. Not a reef, not an islet. No more
that his everyday conversation must have been packed with such vivid
So I was marveling at this delightful sunrise, so life-giving and
subtle phosphorescence, members of the genus Beroe that are commonly
the bay from southerly winds. It dropped straight down to the sea, and
so to speak. I observed that the Red Sea’s water was becoming less
plus some flying gurnards, authentic underwater swallows that, on dark
wait for daylight, and then we’ll play a different role.”
In essence, beating the bushes, the two friends flushed a herd of
“Dangerous?” Ned Land replied. “A simple trip to an oysterbank?”
“Let master take the risk,” Conseil said, “and we’ll know where we
“What risks would you run in a job like that?” Ned Land
I was speechless with horror, unable to make a single movement.
thing. Hunger spurred us on. The hunters had counted on consuming the
me?
locomotive tubes, sucking water into these tubes and then expelling
However, at 14,000 meters I saw blackish peaks rising in the midst of
Near four o’clock in the morning, the submersible picked up speed. We
The Canadian was obviously at the end of his patience. His vigorous
atmospheres, all the while letting through strong, heat-generating
“Sharks?” I exclaimed.
control the sun as he did the sea.
air tank that would revive him. Captain Nemo set the example and was
I was swimming in perspiration, I was stifling, I was about to be
by the ancient Greeks, or those designations of “rat ray,” “bat ray,”
fancies dictated. For my part, I was no longer worried about those
altitude, I spotted the summits of the Arfak Mountains, rising in
indicated. He observed it a good while. As for me, deeply puzzled, I
“But with all due respect to master,” Conseil ventured to observe,
“Yes, my friend,” I answered, “it was an electric ray that put you in
Captain Nemo didn’t appear. Just as I was about to leave the lounge,
bank of this river, all loaded down with country homes—and passed by
control. More in command of himself, Captain Nemo remained
that sooner or later such excavations do take place, once new towns
coldly:
them reappeared on the platform.
snakes. Despite its speed, the Nautilus navigated for several hours in
helm shout, ‘Our propeller and rudder are smashed!’ ”
“But if they don’t exist, my stubborn harpooner, how do you explain
bewhiskered mullet marked with pairs of black lines, white gobies from
Ice Bank, still quite thick to judge from the hollowness of the
fallen across a gorge, without looking down, having eyes only for
as 300 meters long; genuine cables more than an inch thick and very
high its blowholes are spouting all that air and steam! Damnation! Why
of the wind, claps of thunder. The wind shifted to every point of the
Captain Nemo decided to take his Nautilus down to the lowest depths in
“Not too much, to be candid with master. I was lacking a few
had not Ned Land, quick as thought, rushed forward with his harpoon
his brother, a friend for his friend, what could be simpler? That’s
After leaving this gulf we raised Muscat for an instant, the most
“Pardon me, Ned. Fishermen and scientists!”
with caution so as not to bump into this underwater barrier.
by name as the Gulf Stream. After emerging from channels off Florida,
shores, some seed fell onto these limestone beds, mixing with
This stream of electricity dazzled my eyes, and after momentarily
And with that, the gallant lad went away.
fastened to the topside of this sheet-iron back, and we all held on
storm, then commits mass murder, collapses in catatonic paralysis, and
“Perhaps here, perhaps in China. You know how quickly the Nautilus
For two days we visited these deep and deserted waters by means of our
Conseil, with good reason, will long remember.
“I fully expect to!” I replied in a tone of deep conviction.
liked to call it—without observing its lower strata, without wresting
in the coffee houses, they ridiculed it in the newspapers, they
suffering any organic disorders. It consists of a tank built from
sensations rising in my brain, competing with him in exclamations of
won’t mention every variety that passed before our dazzled eyes. More
west-northwest, between latitude 13 degrees 30’ and 23 degrees 50’
observed—and nothing could have been more fascinating to me than to
six meters in circumference; so it was even bigger than those fine
put it at an eighth of an inch per biennium.
Just then a fairly loud hissing told me that the ballast tanks were
short of copy, you saw the reappearance of every gigantic imaginary
lanterns, was illuminated for a radius of twenty-five meters.
daintily and abundantly fed. Our host had kept to the terms of his
waves. I assumed that the crew were busy with interior repairs,
We heaved the log a second time.
strolling on the platform, asked me if I knew how salt water differs
most remarkable being the one called the Gulf Stream. Science has
the other, and scampered off with respectable speed.
Just then a stone whizzed toward us, landed at our feet, and cut short
the sea grew turbulent, we went below again, and the hatch closed once
fathom! This was humiliating for one of the fastest racers in the
“It always floats.”
thrilling and dreadful scenes to my eyes. In essence, we were then
And if Professor Toussenel is correct, this plague is nothing compared
of antiquity made a special study of them, and these animals furnished
with protuberant hides, sturgeons resembling their relatives in the
can say. But I’m tempted to think that the commander and his chief
sea. Slanting inward over their base, these high walls converged to
As he spoke, Captain Nemo seemed deeply moved, an emotion I felt was
times is Plato himself. His dialogues Timaeus and Critias were drafted
“But where are the fish?” the Canadian ventured to observe. “I don’t
“All right, sit down, my friends, and I’ll teach you everything I
now let’s get to work!”
“Mr. Land,” I answered, “we have to adapt to the schedule on board,
crowned by a peak of great height.
Egypt, the Nautilus will go back down to the Indian Ocean, perhaps
it. Accordingly, I was content to reply:
shown me so many wonders across the Pacific, the Indian Ocean, the Red
that appalled not only Verne but all Europe. As originally conceived,
“And could you kindly tell me what everybody knows?” he asked me in a
“What an experience!” I exclaimed. “Traveling these deep regions where
furnace it couldn’t brave with impunity. A quarter of an hour later,
thirty-nine stars gleamed from the gaff of the mizzen sail; then,
to even dream of escaping, and I’ll let the reader decide how promptly
inaccessible spot on the globe to any human being.
ventured to observe, “dextrality” is a well-known law of nature. In
Nautilus lay in precisely the locality where this second cable
to the Center of the Earth features travel to the earth’s core. But
life? Doesn’t it experience both anger and affection? Last evening it
Portuguese waters. Heading north, it was cruising along the ocean’s
master fainting, it left me without the slightest desire to
At three o’clock in the morning, I was awakened by a violent
surrounded us and closed off the horizon. Nevertheless, Captain Nemo
“What are they, captain?” I asked.
one dreadful word, told me the reason for the agitation spreading
Conseil’s hand, giving still greater relevance to his observation.
circumstance, the tank on my diving equipment can supply breathable
light and tried to follow alongside; but most of them were
hundred savages, howling and gesticulating, entered the water up to
Dibranchiata and the Tetrabranchiata, which are distinguished by their
Near eleven o’clock in the morning, while on the surface of the ocean,
between Liverpool and Halifax, featuring three wooden ships with
dimensions. This served as a tank for the compressed air, which a
sleeping like a man who had never done anything else.
However, the weather held good. Our voyage was proceeding under the
like to register some reservations about the rifle with which you’ll
under the waterside trees, I repaired to my cabin and fell into a
By six o’clock in the evening, we were back on the beach. The skiff
and how could we prevent this liquid medium from solidifying, then
leading role, the role of stabilizer for the general ecology of the
“And I don’t think,” the Canadian said, “that your Nemo would object
Two hours later, the same noises, the same comings and goings, were
In discussing these colossal plants, Conseil, Ned, and I were
as if passing the dead in review!
all the way to the horizon, the skies kept mirroring the whiteness of
Tierra del Fuego, the Land of Fire, a name given it by early
Nevertheless, he didn’t waste an instant. At his signal, the chief
By then Commander Farragut, Ned Land, and I were on the afterdeck,
from these waterways, our nets brought up some peacock-tailed
emerged from the Strait of Gibraltar and made for that cape in the
Before more carefully examining the interior features of this enormous
thrown into coils awash in liquid. In a few minutes the water reached
and he could barely conceal his disappointment.
five o’clock, surveying the beach, observing and studying. The only
made from the dissolved flesh of its polyps will furnish an excellent
have to do is draw it from an ad hoc spigot.* Besides, Professor
whose explanation the whole world had sought in vain? What beings
“And possibly dangerous!” I added in an insinuating tone.
depression, a 3,000-meter pit. Here the Gulf Stream widens. Its waters
“Our lighting equipment would be useless to us,” the captain answered
I showed my companions this small, stray rock in the middle of the
the Center of the Earth (1864), then added: “Soon I hope you’ll take
“Captain,” I said, “I don’t doubt—”
other view that by collecting in this way over the centuries, these
With the chart under my eyes, I looked for the Gulf of Mannar. I found
you have pressing reasons for looking me up?”
Nothing good, because at first they kept it at a respectful
enormous machine still seemed completely deserted.
mass more and more. The seafloor changed little by little. Its
“Build houses,” Conseil said.
ladder. I followed him and went back to the main lounge. The propeller
1861.”
midst of this wealth. You’re a man who gathers his treasure in
to protect my professorial dignity and not lay myself open to laughter
existed. Wouldn’t that be my right?”
Even so, these Atlantic fish were not noticeably different from those
the most important in the class, consists of two families. Examples:
Just then its peak appeared before us, standing out distinctly against
The next day, February 7, we entered the Strait of Bab el Mandeb,
working titles over the period 1865-69: early on, it was variously
mists so feared by navigators. These are caused chiefly by melting
impenetrable iron armor, but below its waterline, where the metal
COMMANDER FARRAGUT was a good seaman, worthy of the frigate he
the sight of this new monster meddling in the battle. But they soon
returned the compliment; a born stoic, punctilious on principle,
regions lacking in wheat; without needing to be cultivated, it bears
naturalist, but meantime I’ll be acting like a baker! Conseil, harvest
There my eyes fell on the compass. Our heading was still
lounge whose purposes are unknown to me. May I learn—”
flames, but which now lets in this life-giving air we’re breathing.”
followed him boldly. My alpenstock was a great help. One wrong step
nine large islands and forms a 120-league strip from the
of Gibraltar.”
boundary line, there you stop, like it or not!”
“Francs!” Conseil rebuked.
to steer right or left, up or down! How do you reach the lower depths,
himself, he was unable to weigh anchor until March 17.
where you meet an increasing resistance that’s assessed in hundreds of
South Orkney Islands. The captain told me that many tribes of seals
When our breadfruit harvesting was done, we took to the trail to
stricken with apoplexy on the ocean floor.”
should have said to the northeast. Sometimes on the surface of the
From these seas I’ll also mention some unusual specimens of croakers,
that I was about to witness a strange scene. Observing the seafloor, I
incomparable clarity.
sanctuaries, I envisioned hosts of unknown animals, and this
flag, the Nautilus covered about 2,000 miles from December 4 to the
THE WAY HE SAID THIS, the unexpectedness of this scene, first the
the gaff of its fore-and-aft sail, and I couldn’t tell its
different glow depending on the nature of the veins running inside the
mechanism transmitting movement to the propeller.
It was a man, a living man, a black Indian fisherman, a poor devil who
The cabin was dark; but my eyes soon grew accustomed to its darkness
my hands, and for a few moments I could breathe luxuriously.
“What I’ve got to tell you is very simple,” the Canadian
history at the Paris Museum and entrusted with a scientific mission
double current, rising and falling, constant movement, constant life!
southernmost regions. So where was it bound? The pole? That was
without spoiling. When I want some, I’ll just cook it in the galley on
the ballast tanks. Perhaps they wouldn’t sufficiently increase the
Aside and in special compartments, strings of supremely beautiful
fleeting glimmer, but its effect was indescribable. The captain stood
cartilaginous fish ten feet long and weighing 600 pounds, their
supplies me, albeit sparingly. Do you still miss your Cubans, sir?”
word. My mind was in a total daze. My mental processes came to a dead
passed the wide estuary formed by the mouth of the Rio de la Plata,
Brazil’s populous shores, because he shot by with dizzying speed. Not
sure. If I recommend that he aim carefully at this dugong, it’s
interior. Without this precaution we wouldn’t have awakened the
metric tons. So I was obliged not to exceed this weight while building
unable to reach the underwater soil at 15,149 meters.
“Rifles in hand.”
crossed arms and blazing eyes, he seemed to be laying claim to these
And if Mr. Ned Land did not repent of his gluttony at our oyster fest,
there’s plenty of work here for a classifier of your talents.”
Ecclesiastes—“Who can fathom the soundless depths?”—two men out of all
the finest in Captain Nemo’s immense domains. He regarded it as his
yet . . . !
the sharp crests of coral.
Nemo offered your freedom to you this very day. Would you accept?”
22. The Lightning Bolts of Captain Nemo
There the obsessive fears in my brain left me. I became surprisingly
possible that after crossing every sea on the globe, Captain Nemo will
below the horizon in the sun’s rays. The entire sky, although lit up
seems like I’m breathing a sea breeze!”
couple million zoophytes and tangles of algae. My feet often slipped
these I spotted, much to my glee, a Chinese ray, yellowish on its
centimeters are tolerating 17,568 kilograms at this very moment.”
of a solid triangle, sometimes that of a solid quadrangle. Among the
the subtlety of its progressive shadings into the ocean’s upper and
salt water one degree above its freezing point. And if I’m not
if one of these animals went from the Bering Strait to the Davis
world, the first men had to their forests on land. Besides, who else
silently.
lights on the coast! How many casualties have been caused by these
isosceles triangle. This breach in the sheet iron was so perfectly
I’ll show you mine!”
clearly that nothing would ever force him to set foot on a land mass
spot in the sector depicting the southernmost seas.
but under it.”
underwater tour of the world. Accordingly, I’ll rest content with
100,000 kilograms.
strides, helped by our alpenstocks; but in general our progress was
poor fellow countryman!
For a quarter of an hour, we continued to watch the craft bearing down
found a note addressed to me on the table.
just as someday everything will return to it!”
algae, when I raised my head and spied two enormous masses hurtling
degrees or -40 degrees cold on the surface.”
spectrum.
such misshapen costumes as the cork breastplates, leather jumpers,
railings. Its deck was covered with dark, quivering shadows.
harpooner was a waste of words. Ned Land stared at Captain Nemo and
After changing clothes, I climbed onto the platform, and in the grip
circle of the earth on a rhumb line; it then divides into two arms
following the captain’s example, I added some drops of a fermented
During that day a fearsome school of sharks provided us with an
This encounter reminded me that other, more daunting animals must be
ship’s air tanks were nearly empty. The little air that remained had
two dreadful headlands so feared by navigators, Cape Horn and the Cape
I straightened suddenly. I admit that I was less than ready for this
jumping overboard, and I suggest you follow suit.”
its longboats.
its steadiness and intensity. Such a vacuum also reduced wear on the
THE SAME DAY, I reported to Conseil and Ned Land that part of the
“That was a close call!” Conseil then said.
inexhaustible wet nurse of a sea not only feeds me, she dresses me as
the 23rd of that same month, he reached the 74th parallel, a position
coast. It obviously didn’t want to frequent the waves of the Gulf of
fast, banged their powerful tails against the glass of our panels,
animal ten times more powerful, launch it at a speed of twenty miles
filling, and the Nautilus sank beneath the waves of the Atlantic.
Soon Keeling Island disappeared below the horizon, and our course was
this isn’t Bouguer’s Squid, it’s at least one of his close relatives!”
the Sommerard artifacts exhibition!”
“None at all, my friends, at least in those that go beyond the bounds
the harpooner’s proposition.
Ice Bank?
the jaw, and whose palate arch is locked to the skull by sutures that
you seafaring fellows say. The Nautilus is approaching populated
unlimited. I felt an unbearable queasiness. This day of waiting seemed
insanity, wanted his ship to tackle the narrows where Dumont
rigorous scientific observations on this subject.
most violent seas.
makes up the great majority of freshwater fish. Examples: carp, pike.”
Oliva, order Pectinibranchia, class Gastropoda, branch Mollusca—”
from the nearest coast!
CHAPTER 23
us. When this cloud had dispersed, the squid was gone, and so was my
celebrates the high-energy entrepreneurs who lay the Atlantic Cable or
passageway, the island of Santorini, the Cretan diver, the Bay of
stomachs that God has entrusted with scouring the surface of the sea.”
All right, I admit it: I did wish to run this risk!
it’s repulsive and horrible.
refreshed by sleep; his facial features expressed profound sadness,
kept watch on its every movement. Suddenly there was an eruption. The
poetry of Greece and Italy. They called it “nautilus” and “pompilius.”
couldn’t say. Anyhow it lit our way, although hazily, but I soon grew
example.
gave a bizarre yell, and instantly disappeared.
“So count them, Conseil. But it would be less work to believe
But if my desires were fulfilled by the capture of this bird of
couldn’t puncture its hide.”
taking our harpoon along with it. But the barrel soon popped up on the
hand-drawn charts kept in the Nautilus’s library, charts obviously
“Come now, Ned my friend,” Conseil asked, “how would you answer
“Are we up to pressure?” he asked the man.
seriously wondered if we were doomed to spend the rest of our lives in
fish of this island group; but for whatever reason, the panels
strip of steel and weighted with a lead base; they’re genuine little
take us far away from any shore?
That day the Nautilus crossed an odd part of the Atlantic Ocean. No
with equal pressure. When the inside and outside pressures are in
My first concern was to look for the frigate. Had the crew seen me go
frozen in without delay. Which is exactly what happened near two
Abraham Lincoln, this whole island was in rebellion against its
CHAPTER 9
north-northwest, the ship headed toward the Gulf of Oman, carved out
him to set us free. On the other hand, good sense decrees that we take
and microscopic animal life. In essence, heat creates the different
what cusswords spice up my outbursts, they’ve got another think
enter a tavern in his own country!”
had imagined that if it came to this, I would have time to think about
turtle soup made from the daintiest hawksbill, a red mullet with
and he looked! What a look—as if he could magnify objects shrinking
needed to displace only nine-tenths of its volume, hence 1,356.48
stared at the pressure gauge. It told me that the Nautilus was afloat
opaline hues of infinite subtlety raced among sparks of light that
retreating ways.
suddenly hurled into the middle of my stateroom. Apparently the
oxygen. All this water contained a considerable amount, and after it
surface of the sea, your chief sensation is the constant feeling of an
2,000,000 . . . uh . . .”
The captain went out, and soon I saw that at his orders, the Nautilus
could feel us whirling. I was experiencing that accompanying nausea
culprit were detected, he would be thrown overboard without a
and would prove fatal only with difficulty!”
“Well, sir, closing the hatches should do the trick.”
land. But I was done with the shore the day my Nautilus submerged for
replaced it in the process. The heat generated by our batteries was so
Observing Conseil, I discovered that, just barely, the gallant lad had
A Lost Continent
flourished below sea level but they also fashioned picturesque
It was a magnificent sea otter from the genus Enhydra, the only
sleep that comes over every diver. Accordingly, my eyes soon closed
“Not a lick of it, Conseil my friend,” the harpooner replied. “But
and some pineapples of unbelievable size. But this foraging took up a
return for our promise never to reveal his existence? Our word of
natives, armed with bows and slings, appeared barely a hundred paces
“That’s obvious,” I replied.
“Yes, Mr. Land. Its flesh is actual red meat, highly prized, and set
companions. It was a simple quadrangular pyramid, set on a coral base,
seas would soon be depopulated of them. Accordingly, in England and
longitude 94 degrees 33’, we raised Keeling Island, a madreporic
fields,” or smooth, limitless tracts; “drift ice,” or floating floes;
it, haul it on board, and carve it up. They surveyed the sea with
twenty-six years Cunard ships have made 2,000 Atlantic crossings
fisheries. Would you be interested, Professor Aronnax, in visiting one
guess, and for my part, I spent my time studying the fish that passed
surface would be experiencing 1,000 kilograms of pressure. Now, my
nature . . .”
ton or two of water that we had to bail out. But thanks to our
near the end of March. My departure for France was set for early
Roman emperor Vitellius.
with their calls. Crowding the rocks, other fowl watched without fear
vertebrate branch. They have been quite aptly defined as:
“A thousand years,” the Canadian replied without hesitation.
What a chase! No, I can’t describe the excitement that shook my very
behind the cabin at the other end of the platform.
behind. In which case I could only tag along and resume our
surface of the waves! Carried by the Ganges to the high seas, these
getting more and more riled, and despite his word of honor, I was in
a constant depth of 300 meters, the compass that it kept heading
“Oh good, I get to go bear hunting tomorrow!” If you’re invited to
cleared the equator and doubled Cape Horn or the Cape of Good Hope?”
his own? Would I find a whole colony of exiles down here, men tired of
THE NEXT MORNING, February 19, I beheld the Canadian entering my
tried to reach Vanikoro, where, according to the native boatman, a
“But what hour is it, then?” the Canadian asked.
Ned looked at me with a bantering expression.
surface of the ocean. I leaped onto the platform. Ned Land was already
ended in a small promontory and there, mute and motionless, with
collision we need to cause the specified catastrophe.
As for Ned Land, he ended our talk in his best speechifying style:
the air inside hadn’t been renewed; but the air tanks were kept full
certainly seeing some unusual things, and for two months we’ve had no
retracing our steps, we walked for half an hour until we encountered
“All right then! Imagine this weapon to be ten times stronger and the
“What everybody knows, captain,” I answered him.
heard chatting, discussing, arguing, calculating the different chances
reed huts indicated the quarter where the bedouins lived.
arabesques, distributed a soft, clear daylight over all the wonders
hull, whose topside formed a sort of horizontal platform, when I felt
to see that “shrouded human figure, very far larger in its proportions
“I wouldn’t double dare him,” Conseil replied.
“So,” the captain went on, “when the Nautilus lies on the waves under
The ceiling lights were off, yet the lounge was still brightly
demands a strength—”
claims he saw, while aboard the Castilian in 1857, one of those
“Professor,” he said to me, “would you like to go with me to the
ocean. Voluntary watches from the crosstrees of the topgallant sail
“Come.”
than any dweller among men,” thrown across the cataract that protects
absolutely must bag some game to placate this man-eater, or one of
grayish sky.
the waves. It was no longer illuminated water, it was liquid light.
sun-carrier shells found in the southernmost seas, finally and rarest
zoophytes would have been offered to my gaze, if, on the evening of
“No, no, professor. I’ll go along with anything you want except
served, I was able to identify various daintily dressed fish; but I
“Birds of paradise!” I exclaimed.
I observed that all these exhibits from the vegetable kingdom were
in the Torres Strait, the coral cemetery, the pearl fisheries of
shores of Japan. At noon on this day of November 8, we hereby begin
it our proximity to these European shores? Was he reliving his
tanks. Indeed, in a few moments the Nautilus had submerged some meters
mystery that fascinated me so. Then my eyes focused on a huge world
a moment’s rest.
“I’m unable to say, Ned.”
with multiple rows of teeth and capable of cutting a man in half. I
Vinci, a nymph by Correggio, a woman by Titian, an adoration of the
other words, under a pressure of 100 atmospheres. In this instance the
like the English with their Irish stews.
the waters, and as they went, throwing off every gleam in the solar
“Therefore, with all due respect to master, I think a ‘happy year’
“As simple as that?”
conversation. But it was impossible to speak, impossible to reply. I
no matter how heavy, could bear the thrusts of his spur? No man among
His whole being was concentrated in this last word.
surface, I throw the propeller in gear, and the water’s pressure makes
Verne’s two early novels Five Weeks in a Balloon (1863) and Journey to
recovering our freedom, and he’ll keep on his guard, above all in seas
But the Nautilus wanted nothing to do with these nasty animals. Timor
of the East Indies and the Pacific! I was putting down my novel half
absolute calm of the waves facilitated this operation. The Nautilus
I stood there until six o’clock in the morning, Captain Nemo never
After seeing these, Ned Land exhibited an obvious distaste for the
ice. There also were walls above and below. Above, because the Ice
“Like most Flemish people, with all due respect to master.”
saturated with electric light. The sandy bottom was clear and
the greatest care but without pronouncing a word. Then, turning to his
vanishing from our surroundings altogether. We walked with steady
“Keep stoking the furnaces.”
readily in six months as now.”
returning, they don’t traipse in wreaths and gold ribbons to say
moss-covered monument, motionless as if petrified in some mute
submersible was no resisting rock that waves could demolish; it was a
disappear under the waves of the rising tide. But I saw their numbers
final moments, so to speak! And already I could see enormous sharks
good deal of our time, which, even so, we had no cause to regret.
miles during the night. It lay well out, a good league from the coast,
Similar events were likewise observed in Pacific seas, on July 23 of
I returned to the lounge. The Nautilus still emerged above the
varying resistance of metals to electric currents. The results so
lives. I noted several species I hadn’t previously been able to
socket, and the Nautilus plunged back beneath the waves.
“But, sir,” the Canadian went on, “in the Red Sea you authorized us to
some excellent fruit that should have completed his provisions.
“And plenty good for us!” Ned Land shot back. “There’ll be more left
chasing fish and mollusks, eating the little ones, eaten by the big
days, and it was so wide, two triple-tiered galleys could pass through
latitudes.
covering. I finished harnessing myself, I felt an alpenstock being
things, “is this pearl fishing ever dangerous?”
The Nautilus had cleared 8,100 miles. We logged 9,720 miles when we
enormous gains, because this scuttled treasure is estimated to be
kept opening up before our steps. Captain Nemo entered beneath a dark
Sargasso Sea, they had great difficulty navigating in the midst of
because some rays of light from the library had filtered into the
the Nautilus rise vertically, as an air balloon inflated with hydrogen
We were finally in the area of the monster’s latest antics! And in all
I wrote it on paper manufactured from marine eelgrass.
Captain Nemo rejoined me. I stood up and said to him:
“Good!” the Canadian replied. “From now on we’ll pay closer attention
overboard and attack the creature in its own element.
varnish the bird, and ship the fruits of their unique labors to
the sea.
And so, by loading up its ballast tanks, or by sinking obliquely with
offered a single protrusion that could hamper its maneuvers.
Four Thousand Leagues Under the Pacific
well out from any coast. Either the Nautilus surfaced only enough to
seemed to glide right down the middle of these rampaging reefs. It
the moment of our noon sights, the sea was deserted and the ship rose
distinct series: the series of bony fish, in other words, those whose
abundant. Some were four meters long. More tranquil and less fearful
purposes. With the thrust of its propeller curbed by the slant of its
Mediterranean, trumpet-snouted pipefish a foot and a half long,
I’ll mention chiefly some trunkfish unique to the Red Sea, the sea of
submerged forest. The trails were cluttered with algae and fucus
sense of. It seemed to me that my heavy lead soles were crushing a
and more startled.
it’s estimated that if the sea bottom were made level, its average
opportunity for hatching all sorts of hoaxes. In those newspapers
Captain Nemo guided the Nautilus next to the animal’s corpse. Two of
claimed they could drive off sea monsters from the waters they
dangers to the vessels of the ancients. Picture those early navigators
daily strolls on the platform where I was revived by the life-giving
yellowish brown with small gray fins and no teeth or tongue, unreeling
bouquets. Far off, like a sleeping cetacean: the Nautilus. Behind us
“Rifles in hand?”
crept on your belly. But helped by the Canadian’s strength and
fashion.
scent, and those splendid water plants, flowers of the sea, have no
breathing, just as fearsome . . . ! Then my mind grew calmer, my
us their serial numbers! But no, nothing but silence and death filled
museum.
the Mediterranean hadn’t allowed him to put his plans into execution,
“You’ll see.”
to the north Atlantic, scorpionfish, and lastly the gadoid family,
GRAM Roughly 1/28 of an ounce
methods, releasing the oxygen contained in potassium chlorate by
officer who extended his hand to me.
This scene lasted barely a few seconds. The shark returned, rolled
My head struck against an iron timber, and with this violent shock I
east of
allure of its electric light could continually replenish.
“In 1600, sir, the Dutchman Gheritk was swept by storms and currents,
speaking to us, without even seeing us perhaps, he went to the panel,
impulsive fisherman to such temptations.
me. The obstinate Canadian refused, and I could clearly see that his
enormous head of this cetacean occupies about a third of its
single dorsal fin denoting the genus Physeter, some pilot whales from
thirteen decimeters, appeared in silver and azure costumes encircled
windows, and our notes enable me to reconstruct, in a few words, the
machinery and stokers neglecting their furnaces. The order was given
albacore, and a few varieties of that sea serpent named the moray eel.
“Where are we?” the Canadian exclaimed. “In the Quebec Museum?”
slices of loin were still left.
fascinating exhibits to describe in my daily notes! Among other
thought the beacon had gone back on and was casting its electric light
as agile and supple in water, where they are sometimes mistaken for
indicated an object that I hadn’t yet noticed.
“. . . gives us the quotient of 625. Which is tantamount to saying
comment:
“All right, you can try your luck!”
geography of this island group. The Nautilus drew near Wailea Bay, an
“Don’t be alarmed,” the captain told me. “That’s Nicolas from Cape
“And that’s everything we know?” the Canadian asked.
Bank! Behold my greatest source of irritation—a wall!”
streaked with violent flashes of lightning. I couldn’t stand this
law he was hereby detained, invoked writs of habeas corpus, threatened
monster’s death rattle. Pierced to the heart, it was struggling with
sniffing the air with its huge nostrils, pierced not at the tip of its
then, set on man’s underwater excursions.
“Where could one find greater silence or solitude, professor?” Captain
this comparative gloom. I distinguished the unpredictably contoured
this field of catastrophes!
or object that was serving as our refuge. I tested it with my
mollusk is now known by the name argonaut.
weight was so considerable that when they tugged on the rope, the
immediately. I like things over and done with.
you’d need the stomach of King Gargantua to eat a couple dozen.
With one vigorous stroke of its fins, the voracious animal shot toward
reverberating faintly. Captain Nemo was there. He didn’t see me. Even
these clear waters not yet disturbed by divers at work.
a collision in the Nautilus’s bow. I realized that its spur had just
transmitting about 400 telegrams, it went dead. In 1863 engineers
question, its unprecedented speed of movement, its startling
north-northwest to the south-southeast, lying between latitude 2
sole purpose in life, was to hunt down this disturbing monster and rid
I’d be sorry to have missed it! Many people would welcome the
business; to harpoon it called for sighting it—which was the crew’s
Oh, my heart nearly exploded with excitement and horror! The squid’s
“Captain!” I said to him.
weather; the humidistat, which indicates the degree of dryness in the
“In that event I’ll try to get hold of the skiff. I know how to handle
only one-tenth belong to fresh water. The sea is a vast pool of
of you!”
waters. What’s more, I’ve detected those falling and rising currents
reply.
diamonds were merging with each other. Swept along by its propeller,
with their immense treasures.”
flattering to the man.
that spread out into countless branches and ended in the most delicate
of the waves, at least while no whales were in sight. And yet the
that were quite arduous to cross. In all honesty, I was dead tired by
250 feet. Its girth was more difficult to judge, but all in all, the
Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas
even dealing with the subject, for which one day I felt compelled to
The captain said a few words to his chief officer who went out
volcano whose interior was invaded by the sea after some convulsion in
supplied with a generous allowance of fresh oxygen. A considerable but
Half an hour after the Canadian’s latest exploits, we were back on the
companions will visit the Mannar oysterbank, and if by chance some
Little by little Ned developed a taste for chatting, and I loved
the narwhale mimicked the frigate, simply rode with the waves, and
memories of that country he had left behind? If so, what did he feel?
sitting firmly on a carpet of sand that sparkled beneath our streams
the Nautilus swerved away.
every effort.
cavern and circle its lagoon, seize the day.”
the crew examined the horizon, which shrank and darkened little by
Arago nor the English physicist Faraday.
before, perhaps 500 or 600 of them. Taking advantage of the low tide,
away from the ship, involved in some secret activity whose nature
see, and I watched clouds race by, disheveled by the west wind,
hear it. I was at the end of my strength; my fingers gave out; my
transferred me there. But I could breathe, I could inhale the
island of that name at longitude 122 degrees. This island, whose
“passengers on the Nautilus,” in other words, the literal prisoners of
“What good would a pearl worth millions do us here on the Nautilus?”
a cage, striking the walls with his foot and fist. Meanwhile the hours
from the water’s pressure, and allowed the lungs to function freely;
we’ll see a second Nautilus within the next 100 years! Progress is
see you tomorrow, bright and early.”
turned to stone by the action of the waters, and crowned here and
wings.
“Then we’re done for!”
My companions and I had decided to escape as soon as the vessel came
females, and where life and activity once existed, those fishermen
“Not at all, professor,” the captain answered me after a slight
“That’s what I’ve been telling you, Ned.”
“Who has denied you that right?” Captain Nemo replied. “Did I ever try
are wide and slow-moving, its tides moderate, its rainfall
at the surface.
I wanted to verify the Nautilus’s heading. I made my way to the
comfort, victims to avenge? Don’t you understand . . . ?”
some Canadian provinces. The harpooner’s family originated in Quebec,
oysters. The others had rugged black surfaces, measured up to fifteen
glimmers of dawn were whitening the surface of the ocean.
on the ocean floor. My alarm increased. The Canadian’s signal hadn’t
elsewhere for the site of the shipwreck. In essence, a whaling vessel
temperature. I mean the Gulf Stream.
required by the engine’s strenuous mechanical action.
changed into blazing streaks. The sparkles from these myriads of
atmosphere on land but almost as transparent. Above me I could see the
he come? I saw only the helmsman imprisoned in his glass-windowed
“Pretty nearly, Ned.”
As you know, at the turn of the tide, the waters confined between the
“And so . . . ?”
a few managed to keep pace in the Nautilus’s waters.
happy to sink my teeth into.”
birds passing over our heads, swiftly skimming the surface of the sea.
situation, we’re still in the dark.”
ship’s electricity. Anyone who touched it got a fearsome shock—and
the Amazon’s current must have swept out to sea because their natural
“The sea’s rough, the wind’s blowing hard, but a twenty-mile run in
perfected by the Englishmen Philippe-Coles and Burley, the Frenchman
blocks, and swirls of smoke could barely squeeze through the narrow
was at home. Like his fabled Arthur Gordon Pym, I expected any moment
seagoing tunics, barrel helmets, etc., invented and acclaimed in the
“Me, I’m out like a light!” Ned Land replied.
down to these seas not yet plowed by the ships of man.
Captain Nemo’s first words were spoken to the Canadian.
The beach was strewn with mollusks: small mussels, limpets, smooth
given these mammals a major role to play. In essence, manatees, like
it a prayer for the dead, murmured in that language I couldn’t
“Wasn’t its head,” Conseil went on, “crowned by eight tentacles that
“Go on, Ned.”
perfumes you’ll find on the washstand in your cabin were produced from
air, they inevitably had to make periodic visits to the surface of the
answered me. “When an iceberg is eroded at the base by warmer waters
come back for seconds, I’m no longer the King of Harpooners!”
I’m writing of this bold companion as I currently know him. Because
“I might add,” he went on, “that I’m as handy with a pick as a
“It’s maybe . . . ,” Ned said, hesitating.
Without trying to reconcile the contradictions between Captain Nemo’s
even suggested my fetching Ned or Conseil.
14. The Black Current
Nautilus’s exploits supply an episodic story line. Shark attacks,
ranted, gesticulated, shouted, and finally conveyed by an expressive
would have been abruptly extinguished.
hour and a depth of 100 meters.
What it meant I was unable to say.
Spitzbergen, where its temperature falls to 4 degrees centigrade, and
Farragut put a longboat to sea? Could I hope to be rescued?
“If you held a harpoon, Mr. Land, wouldn’t your hands be itching to
salinity and density, can produce enough motion to sustain the
this whirlpool just as the skiff was about to detach from its plating?
hadn’t made an appearance. Its absence disturbed me. Without it, no
it on the outskirts. A circumstance less than encouraging.
is believed to exceed that of spring water. The mineral and organic
agreement. He did nothing of the sort. I regretted that.
once again, closer to European seas.
“It’s right here!”
We chased it unflaggingly for a full hour, and I’d begun to think it
hence about 600 cubic meters. Assuming the same work would be
ground by convulsions in the earth. These views were varied
weather or foul,” as Ned Land told me.
little chance of getting one. And in truth, we used up a good part of
cyclones specifically engendered by the Gulf Stream’s current. To face
danger. Tomorrow, on the day stated and at the hour stated, the tide
Always that same fierce, implacable defiance of human society!
name as Rhodymenia palmata.
hour. And even at our maximum speed, it took the liberty of thumbing
“I’m sorry I didn’t marry the gal,” the Canadian said, throwing up his
encounter will provide great rewards.”
clusters of flowers drooped sadly, their colors and scents were
this damned prison, we’ll still be cooped up beneath the Ice Bank,
bearing from southeast to northwest at a speed of two and a half miles
with all the pearl oysters they can tear loose. But these fishermen
(characterized by gill covers and a bronchial membrane), I noted some
salty river, saltier than the sea surrounding it. Its average depth is
mouth of Old Bahama Channel. We then went with the current of the
What was the bond between these heroic souls and the soul of Captain
measure proved fruitless, it could arouse the captain’s suspicions,
answered with his hand, immediately swam up to the surface of the sea,
the spyglass, which showed the orb of day cut into two exactly equal
seas of civilization! Then it will be time to resume Ned Land’s
flooded, and the Essex went down fast.”
the Adriatic.”
with calculations in which there was no shortage of X and other
heading, I noted that it was proceeding toward the ancient island of
On November 26, at three o’clock in the morning, the Nautilus cleared
an ill-timed stone, hurled by one of the islanders, whizzed over and
over sharp lava and pumice stones in the midst of air often reeking
from Captain Nemo. He asked me very graciously if I felt exhausted
and our discussions are futile. My gallant Ned, if you come and tell
is thirty seconds, during which they hastily stuff their little nets
simultaneous observations, they were able to estimate the mammal’s
“Why not, Professor Aronnax?”
door shut in his face.
latter has a diameter of 6 meters, a pitch of 7.5 meters, and can do
A quarter of an hour later, our trunks were ready. Conseil did them in
number of supporters. Moreover, the solution it proposed allowed for
surrounding us.”
Good for you, I thought.
endless. The hours struck too slowly to keep up with my impatience.
Mr. Land doesn’t despise a choice morsel.”
absolutely no idea what happened to this revolution, and Captain Nemo,
with their telltale rings. So this proved to me that some connection
their bloom thanks to the moist vitality of the waters.
fairly low on the horizon, struck full force on the houses in this
sea to the other. But although that tunnel was easy to descend, going
“Yes, Ned, he had business with his bankers.”
honestly be said that he had stretched between himself and his
mass measuring 4,500,000 cubic leagues, which if it were spread all
standard mullet with yellow heads, parrotfish, wrasse, triggerfish,
“Here we are,” the captain said.
hoping he would come around to the idea of not deserting the captain;
“Here it is,” Captain Nemo replied, showing me a chart of the Greek
left myself a loophole. Yet deep down, I had accepted the existence of
“Well, sir,” the Canadian asked, “couldn’t I hunt them, just so I
American navy. The crew were working up into a blind rage. Sailor
“Oh,” he exclaimed, “if only my Nautilus were strong enough to stand
dreadful Squalus melanopterus from the seas of the East Indies, a
Land, who cut them into thick slices and placed them over a fire of
that’s fastened to the rear of the sternpost and worked by a wheel and
intense that certain areas of the light became shadows by comparison,
equator by the Gulf Stream’s current, or from the North Pole by the
you could fit Mt. Blanc without its summit poking above the surface of
whale will someday disappear from the ocean.
And there was good reason to be excited! In fact, as naturalists have
And when I compared this deep calm of the elements with all the fury
to disperse these sperm whales. It’s armed with a steel spur quite
“Yes, Ned my friend. It had a picture that portrayed the devilfish in
cells. Their limestone deposits build up into rocks, reefs, islets,
for dear life.
the English fleet lay across those waterways, the admiral decided to
over these inexhaustible Grand Banks.
I took one last look at the sea, a little yellowish near the landing
aground, the savages of Papua, the coral cemetery, the Suez
the work of an instant. We hadn’t gone two cable lengths when a
examined its undersides in the service yard, they discovered that part
AT THIS SHOUT the entire crew rushed toward the harpooner—commander,
Meanwhile, his photographic operations over, Captain Nemo told me:
suicidally runs his ship into the ocean’s most dangerous
“What you’re inflicting on us is outright slavery!”
longer grow. We know that oysters and pilgrim scallops live in 2,000
lions, tigers, panthers, or other quadrupeds. They’re known only to
time for explanations. Four crewmen were waiting at the door, and they
sarcasm. “Oh I do believe you! Let’s forge ahead! There are no
indescribable fury. Ned Land hadn’t missed his target. This was the
up the one belonging to the skiff, simply by screwing it into place. I
the lounge be opened, and going from the one to the other, he
the Nautilus’s men onto the platform. But no. Lying well out, that
1,800 miles from our starting point, and by a slight change of
from the library by a watertight bulkhead, in other words, it couldn’t
that constitute your household sponge, which takes on a russet hue and
“Yes?”
of this gruesome drama. But we barely had time to think. Taking refuge
thereabouts to provision a couple hundred ships.
beauty bushes, delicate rosetangle tinted scarlet, sea colander
words that might escape from his lips!
my last, who knows?—and I’ll review everything I’ve studied in the
that. Some gigantic devilfish maybe . . . ?”
Since Captain Nemo hadn’t yet appeared, only Conseil and I were taken
Caeruleus Proteus . . .*
modern times, in other words, all of humanity’s finest achievements in
because the animal is justly regarded as fine game, and I know
rest of my life!
until some obstacle halts its upward movement, our position won’t
upheaving planted with magnificent coconut trees, which had been
the great French and foreign newspapers. When the monster’s detractors
because we’ve certainly woken up to a new day.”
depths of this underwater crypt? I would soon find out.
Without further ado, Ned Land got down to the important business of
cataloged, and in this event I would be inclined to accept the
himself, seemed almost fascinated, I was stunned.
bid the three of us a fond farewell.”
evening. I therefore calculated on eight hours of swimming until
We spent the whole day of February 22 in the Sargasso Sea, where fish
dead. Still hanging from the tip of its mutilated fin was a little
the fire-dwelling salamanders of myth. In the midst of these flames
I’m counting on you.”
continent. But it’s more likely that these grasses, algae, and fucus
By then I thought our expedition had come to an end, that we would
“Did master sleep well?” Conseil asked me with his perennial good
at the surface of the sea, and so it’s in the upper reaches that they
arrived at the museum where I had spent so many pleasant and
straight and uniform.
lives in the sea more than on shore, going constantly from one island
going with him to the North Pole.”
But aside from this occurring, I didn’t doubt the possibility of our
would seek the sea’s temperature by going himself into its depths, and
me a curt bow. This was my dismissal, and I reentered my stateroom.
Newfoundland, swerves away under the thrust of a cold current from the
which trap air in their flanks and release it in the depths of the sea
foremost in submitting to this strict discipline. When his time was
The taller of the two—apparently the leader on board—examined us with
from the crew.
any sounds, I approached. The stateroom was deserted. I pushed the
“You’re aware, professor, that salt water is denser than fresh water,
with a distinct but inexplicable symmetry. I spotted gigantic furrows
science-fiction writer.” And it’s true, many of his sixty-odd books do
be. In my opinion, we’ll never again have such an opportunity.”
“Thank you, sir,” Ned Land replied, his eyes ablaze.
vertical plane by the simple method of slanting its two fins, which
aboard the Nautilus. We weren’t the cause of the crew’s concern.
contact with the patent log; this needle shows me the actual speed of
if this ship won’t be 100 leagues out to sea? If circumstances are in
and to emerge only one-tenth. Consequently, under these conditions it
perish! I don’t want your wreckage mingling with that of the Avenger!”
how master will reply to him.”
be as honed as the edge of an ax. “But if there’s no other quadruped
night! Captain Nemo and his men had come to bury their companion in
“I’m feeding you the facts.”
me. I encountered him only at rare intervals. He used to take pleasure
heading from top to bottom.
ocean. You’re familiar with some of them, such as the thermometer,
friends of yours sleeping six feet under!”
in other words, there are as many billions in a quintillion as ones in
centigrade, every outside part of the Nautilus was covered with ice. A
dreaming away, until the moment my eyes focused on the instruments
I stood up and could clearly observe the Canadian’s adversary. This
appearance in the midst of the black rocks surrounding it, against
valves of unequal size, a type of ostracod unique to the Red Sea and
pigs”; then some trunkfish known as dromedaries, with tough, leathery
sand, subsequently reinstated by Arabia’s Caliph Omar I, and finally
rivets had been firmly driven into the sheet-iron joins and were
cetacean. Then a sudden thought crossed my mind.
“Then kindly put on your diving suits.”
River, were crowded with curiosity seekers. Departing from 500,000
point between the waters of the lake and the foot of the mountain’s
clearer all at once.
weakened. Meanwhile, after twelve hours had gone by, we had removed
Island over an area of 500 leagues from the east-southeast to the
opportunity won’t ever arise.”
to his credit.
was unlikely, because sooner or later his work would perish with him
We stayed in this place an entire hour, contemplating its vast plains
speak, I myself stepped onto the carcass of a whale near Greenland,
into exploding tufts. You would have thought Captain Nemo was courting
Botanical Gardens in Paris! I accept your kind wishes and I thank you
little schooners engaged in coastal trade over various points on the
flour by sifting it through cloth to separate it from its fibrous
Just then the captain entered the lounge. I went to him.
archangel of hate, was still staring. When it was all over, Captain
productive hours. I stared at all its wealth, all its treasures, like
“What is it?” I asked.
beautiful of their breed, the compass jellyfish, unique to the
idea what the future holds.”
“And your valves are charged to . . . ?”
“And why this powerful constitution?” Ned asked.
carefully. I saw his calm eyes sometimes perk up. In these polar seas
cetaceans do grow to significant size, since they’re said to supply as
and my arguments can’t stand up to yours. It will never do to count on
cetaceans. I hear that some will cover themselves with algae and fucus
appeared. He saw me, and without further preamble:
galleons, laden with gold and silver from America, could enter its
magnificent museum. As the Nautilus’s commander had predicted, my mind
“Serious?”
of balance. From between their stony knees, trees sprang up like jets
stateroom and rejoin my companions.
just squeeze it all in—and hurry!”
would do in the twofold event of our attempt either failing or being
Even so, ten o’clock was about to strike. It was time to leave my
well as underwater, shafts of electric light are transmitted with
manatee relatives, it has become more and more scarce.”
oxygen circulating inside. Not one of them had come up to enjoy the
sea was smooth, the skies clear. Eight miles to the east, a big
detected some rubble the old dredges hadn’t been able to tear
their motionless silhouettes sprawling beneath the waves. There also
Assuredly, Captain Nemo hadn’t seen fit to plant the idea of sharks in
clocks, since neither day nor night, sun nor moon, exist for me, but
hands of Papuan natives.
accent and stylish turns of phrase, the German language met with no
Captain Nemo stared at me. I had asked him nothing, but he read my
CHAPTER 11
by the billions.
whatever his method was, it seemed prudent to me that he use this
conspicuous flame. The level seafloor rose imperceptibly. We took long
second subgenus gave us some Didactylus specimens three to four
the secrets of its scientists don’t make their way ashore.”
have asked for a more devoted following.
blisters; there, shaped like actual prisms and arranged into a series
territory where we could easily have taken refuge. But the wind was
Nemo. Inventor, musician, Renaissance genius, he’s a trail-blazing
“But couldn’t we at least get the lay of the land?” Ned went
hands. He tried to make stones do the work of bullets, and after
lateral fins in actual fingers. It differs from the manatee in that
Finally we lowered our hands.
us.
apathy. Enormous sides of bacon were trailed in our wake, to the great
I watched him more as a naturalist than as a man in hunger. He began
THIS DREADFUL SIGHT was the first of a whole series of maritime
“Because that madcap hunter would kill every animal here.”
humpback whale from the genus Balaenoptera (in other words, “winged
popping out of my head, short of breath, suffocating, speechless, I
those long fishing lines, each armed with 200 hooks, that every boat
“Precisely,” Conseil said.
saturated with our electric rays.
“Farewell, O sun!” he called. “Disappear, O radiant orb! Retire
The three of us followed him, and a few moments later, miraculously
from our glass coils produced magical effects at times, lingering on
my brain was clear of its obsessions from the night before, I was
the level of the ocean. It had to be a continent or at least an
“What your d’Urville did on the surface of the sea,” Captain Nemo told
pantry.
beneath this open sea, and let six months of night spread their
SECOND PART
The remoras I had observed in the Mediterranean were related to this
waves and breezes brought back too many memories, if not too many
matter how heavy the clouds may be, they can’t obscure this
myself being pulled upward, back to the surface of the water; my chest
struggle for world domination. Here on these beaches and waters, says
alarming idea of sharks crossed my mind. But I was mistaken, and once
magnificent wild pig of the type the natives call “bari-outang.” This
sand-covered strip of land where thousands of spectators acclaimed us
“Professor,” the captain answered me, “these forests of mine don’t
often seen along the coasts of Amboina and in these waterways.”
cream-colored tint, plus the streaks and markings that decorated it
CHAPTER 4
23. Conclusion
So only two possible solutions to the question were left, creating two
count them.”
getting closer, it’s coming into the Nautilus’s waters!”
entire world, here’s cream from milk furnished by the udders of
surface they strike. It was such waves in the Hebrides that
or fifteen miles beneath the surface of the water? It’s almost beyond
with sulfurous fumes from the smoke holes. For a man out of practice
“How did he get this wound?” I asked him.
cough medicine.
overtook me, I stretched out on my eelgrass mattress, and I fell into
whose reports are dubious, went along the 42nd meridian, finding open
“It’s impossible.”
badly designed. They have to roll their bellies over to snap you up,
“What are you saying?”
Violent squalls assaulted us during the daytime. Thanks to certain
of the sea.
That night my sleep was fitful. Hope and fear besieged me by turns. I
undulating waves regularly took on the appearance of watered silk with
final hours of our long death throes. But no expression of thanks
My companions and I then witnessed an unusual sight. The panels in the
END OF THE FIRST PART
you. Do you know your Spanish history?”
his course, because if these clumps of coral so much as brush us,
“To the Nautilus,” he said.
these microscopic laborers. These walls were the express achievements
twice that. My eyes scanned the distance and took in a vast area lit
to the island of Aurou, which looked to me like a mass of green woods
meals and a few hours for sleep, come rain or come shine, I no longer
explosion struck my ears.
crossed the Tropic of Cancer.
height of 200 meters. We proceeded toward it, but cautiously, because
“We’ll do it this evening,” he said.
trailing off into the distant darkness, their length
Mammalia, branch Vertebrata,” Conseil replied.
Meanwhile we went ever onward, and these vast plains of sand seemed
had better still. It had Ned Land, the King of Harpooners.
“Why?”
determined to fully exploit the good fortune that had put me on board
of little freckled gobies stippled with brown spots, lungfish with
Rocca de la Plata, in other words, “Silver Rock.” So we were about
but hampered by clothes that were as restricting as a cloak made of
adorned in brilliant colors and sporting a dorsal fin like a sickle,
water gave a temperature of -12 degrees centigrade, but now it gave no
of November 4 arrived with this underwater mystery still unsolved.
Then I heard the sound of footsteps on the platform. I realized that
The transparency of salt water has long been recognized. Its clarity
Lincoln had done everything it could to succeed and had no reason to
lounge.
Assuredly, if the monster ever had to deal with Ned Land’s harpoon, I
8. The Bay of Vigo
This said, Captain Nemo went below again to the Nautilus’s interior,
through the midst of these ruins. On February 18, near three o’clock
“Because this bird is as drunk as a lord.”
all this meat ourselves, while those numbskulls on board won’t get a
some Spirit of the Sea, and as he walked ahead of me, I marveled at
square miles, with a length of 9,000 miles and an average width of
“We must confer with Captain Nemo,” Conseil said.
fatal to divers. With great promptness, the light reappeared and grew
time being, get rid of these notions of taking over the Nautilus or
enlightened the fine lad and let him down gently by giving him various
these Atlantis plains. The ship scudded along like an air balloon
getting repairs at the nearest port.”
prevent their being washed overboard, some human corpses still lay! I
I turned to Captain Nemo. This dreadful executioner, this true
meters, which settled for me its mode of breathing. From this I
shells, husks, or pebbles; they didn’t ask their hosts for sustenance,
As I spoke, I tried to sound more confident than I really
many ships have wrecked, how many vessels have vanished! Compared to
erratically cut foundations, monumental rocks seemed to defy the laws
to form. But here it was no longer some isolated bush or a modest
crashed onto the deck of the frigate, racing like a torrent from stem
Professor Aronnax
suffered the rupture that ruined the undertaking. It happened 638
species into varieties. So I was still missing variety, species,
furnaces! Half a day’s delay would have been unforgivable! But
At this location, in three or four fathoms of water between the Paeu
thirty leagues long and eighty leagues wide, extending between
“Me? Why yes, certainly, of course! I can see that you like the idea,
by the tall tree forms of this underwater forest. Our lamps cast a
the influence of the propeller. It had undoubtedly sunk into the
want to lose this opportunity to meticulously study such a cephalopod
he placed it, not without good reason, in the class of cartilaginous
a deep slumber, while the Nautilus glided through the swiftly flowing
can rival the loveliest tropical birds in coloring, banded blennies
simply can’t wait.”
showering around him:
is just as landlocked as the gulf, since the Isthmus of Suez hasn’t
“But will the sun show through this mist?” I said, staring at the
indeed, unless this reef had an engine in its belly, how could it move
results of intemperance!”
and I heard the captain exclaim:
visit one of these petrified forests that nature has planted on the
ice only one meter thick and drilled by bores in a thousand places.
went any hope of escaping to the landing places of New York or the
I climbed onto the platform. Night had already fallen, because in this
The same day an odd fishing practice further increased the Nautilus’s
ready, sir?”
banished. No, this was no longer the calm emission of our usual
sociable, sometimes headstrong, and quite ill-tempered when
lounge. Ned Land and Conseil were observing the luminous waters
“With my companions?” I asked.
doesn’t own a single live specimen.
may be gracious enough to take me toward the coast of France! That
could transfer itself from one locality to another with startling
oblivion.
That’s atrocious!”
friend about the wonders of our undersea stroll, and the Canadian was
Thalassianthus aster among others, organ-pipe coral arranged like
renowned of marine explorers, called it his shipboard bible.
with certain large Asian lakes to form a single uniform expanse of
300 kilograms. Hence such an oyster held fifteen kilos of meat, and
populated shores, and if some chance for salvation becomes available
of the genus Umbellularia, alcyonarian coral, then a whole series of
“I won’t insist, sir, and I’ll rest content with simply being
“What! You’re complaining?”
turning into an ice field again. The mountains were changing back into
“Aye, sir,” the engineer replied.
that has been so successfully transplanted to the Mascarene Islands
of history concerned me.
water, saying to me:
said. “The ancients well understood the usefulness to commerce of
good while, since we were completely over our exhaustion. I was the
year. Yet this isn’t the case, and we’re naturally forced to believe
“But that’s not all, Professor Aronnax,” Captain Nemo said, standing
resonating chord, and the ship sank steadily under the
The Sargasso Sea
and 210 meters deep. The Nautilus continued to wander at
Some zoophytes were dredged up by the chain of our trawl. Most were
up the insides of a furnace?”
tonight.”
in a fiery setting from which every shadow should seemingly have been
the coast of Tihama, and there such zoophyte displays not only
the Nautilus was about to resume its underwater navigating. So I went
“Eh? What? Didn’t master see that this man-eater initiated the
annelid worms, whose antennas and tubular tentacles were incredibly
As for me, I wasn’t exactly grief-stricken. I felt as if a heavy
only about twenty men on board this machine, I don’t think they can
had become unbearable. From the white it had recently been, the sea
convulsions.
in these two branches, I noted some windowpane oysters with thin
“Now then, if water isn’t absolutely incompressible, at least it
“Class of cartilaginous fish, order Chondropterygia with fixed gills,
“Dinnertime, my fine harpooner? I’d say at least breakfast time,
stayed under five minutes without coming up to the surface, but I find
gifted. If it was a cetacean, it exceeded in bulk any whale previously
blazing fire of deadwood. While these fascinating animals were
unique to this sea. Right after catching them, our seamen dropped them
route, very steep and hence very arduous, quickly took us close to the
turtles or alligators.
yours to command.”
“cold-blooded vertebrates with a double circulatory system, breathing
Finally he came over to me and said:
Which he did that same evening, but strictly as retaliation. Because,
pace of its propeller, the Nautilus carried them off, dragged them
“But there are a large number of these natives.”
Captain Nemo’s benevolence. The most ordinary good sense would forbid
We were silent. What was Captain Nemo thinking? Perhaps that this
our energies so we wouldn’t both be worn out at the same time, and
“Oh, master can trust me on this,” Conseil shot back. “I’ll be
them for the first time.
random. It couldn’t tear itself away from the setting of this last
arises?”
CHAPTER 7
“And that is?”
had a permanent temperature of 4.5 degrees centigrade at a depth of
all self-control. He wanted to rise to the surface of the waves and
So, in our swift cruise through these deep strata, how many vessels I
the Canadian threw a tantrum when I ventured to tell him our
since an engine is needed to generate that speed, and a mechanic to
craft, or even a letter lost. Accordingly, despite strong competition
A half smile curled the commander’s lips; then, in a calmer tone:
I’m reviewing my narrative of these adventures. It is accurate. Not a
bristling with long, vertical water plants, then strangely contoured
“And harpoons, sir,” the Canadian said, “if you don’t turn down my
these superb specimens of marine fauna?”
I was pursuing the policy that we had seen the last of him, when on
chase a dugong!”
an area of 550,000,000 hectares, whose waters are so transparent it
because they could stay longer underwater before returning to breathe
“Will master tell me what this means?” Conseil asked me.
and uneasiness devouring me, I went back to the central
AT SUNRISE the next morning, February 12, the Nautilus rose to the
I liked to think we might achieve it through persuasion. Once this
differed. Carried away by his volatile temperament, the Canadian put
I waited for Captain Nemo. But he didn’t appear. The clock marked the
As a precaution, the panels in the lounge stayed closed, because the
quality of its hull, the Moravian would surely have split open from
I went closer and was forced to recognize the obvious. At the mouth of
degrees 39’ south. This was a position already well along in these
tails, yellow fins, and wholesome, exquisitely tasty flesh; I even
volcanic origin was unmistakable. In certain localities thin smoke
“Yes, funny man,” Ned Land replied. “Then one fine day the animal
“Well, in a pinch can’t my Rouquayrol tank supply me with more? All I
sense of the word! For who would dare chase him to the depths of the
“Which I’ll take advantage of,” the Canadian shot back.
Island, plus a “Neptune’s chariot” from the Caribbean Sea—every superb
spite of me. I was in the grip of anguished hallucinations. Obviously
which fate had left us, it was absolutely impossible to escape. But a
still has to be produced, in short, extracted. And how do you
full warmth of this current, it would supply enough heat to keep
part of the ocean, and many ships have felt terrific tremors when
couldn’t have slashed, torn, or shredded these fleshy masses with
Just then my eye was caught by some etchings hanging on the wall,
The next day at four o’clock in the morning, I was awakened by the
After nightfall the storm grew in intensity. As in the 1860 cyclone on
for that enkindling elastic fluid required for breathing, now growing
mean I’ll wake up half devoured one fine day?”
articulating my every syllable, and not leaving out a single detail. I
likewise elegant Tahiti, queen of the Pacific. In the morning I
all! We’ll succeed the next time, and as soon as this evening, if need
vessels have rammed each other, despite their running lights, despite
sunlight.
sealed, and a mantle of sheet iron separated me from this ocean with
The second stranger deserves a more detailed description. A disciple
Lincoln.
Grijalva in 1527, by the Spanish general Alvaro de Saavedra in 1528,
Since I didn’t say anything, the Canadian stood up and approached me:
“Five nights and four days!” I told my companions. “And we have oxygen
and 10 degrees 2’ south, and between longitude 128 degrees 23’ and 146
Professor at the Paris Museum
clear?”
“This is outrageous!” Ned Land shouted, exploding for the twentieth
oozing from holes around their snouts. They were like monstrous
approaching the vertical. Nobody said a word. Hearts pounding, we
examining this mass, I could identify the swollen outlines of a ship
“What find?”
faces like masks, and dragged us down into their fearsome machine.
zones, where such exhibits are less common. But for a few minutes I
“Those are sperm whales, dreadful animals that I’ve sometimes
war in America, a war lamentable yet forever glorious . . . ?
Nemo. Those strange seamen on the Nautilus were content with the
mother-of-pearl, which are known in the industry by the names
“I’m the law, I’m the tribunal! I’m the oppressed, and there are my
“What!” Conseil put in. “Last night . . . ?”
As for me, I gave in less readily to this intense need for sleep. Too
forward with pleasure to the professor’s companions joining him.
which I would soon grow accustomed. These various food items seemed to
carapaces are harpoon-proof. But our suckerfish would effect their
through a large number of little-known islands and islets, and steered
seas near India.
day, I saw a big ship passing on the horizon, struggling painfully. It
manner. Now then, nature has generally obeyed this law in coiling her
“Oh, professor,” Captain Nemo replied in an ironic tone, “you never
frog crabs whose carapaces form a slightly rounded triangle, robber
rogues, and neither of them has the decency to even answer back!”
decor for the mere pleasure of our eyes, and we were called upon not
lounge. He was coming toward me, arms crossed, silent, not walking but
Tunnel.”
close to the coasts of both Africa and Europe.
getaway schemes while submitting to this irresistible allure. “A man
other words, with a speed of fifteen meters per second, which built to
“Francs!” Conseil said quickly.
crossed over from the vegetable kingdom into the mineral kingdom,
indicating a tremendous tension in the surrounding haze. The mixture
liners.
orb.
All in all, we enjoyed a highly satisfactory state of health. The diet
heavy copper sphere, and our air tanks immediately went into action.
CHAPTER 24
regiment—now that’s a whale of a whale!”
Conseil was already trying to loosen the harpooner’s hands from his
word out of him and feared that, in a fit of delirium while under the
salty the closer we got to Suez.
Ned Land was just pronouncing these last words when we were suddenly
“Speaking for myself,” he said, “I once got walloped by a whale’s
“Yes,” the Canadian replied, “a disabled craft that’s sinking straight
expedition designed to chase this narwhale. A high-speed frigate, the
around us, drilling through it with an odd hissing sound.
and when they are, the Nautilus must rise to the surface of the sea.”
fucus—a genuine trellis of water plants fit for a world of giants.
minute, and steam shot from the valves. Heaving the log, we verified
waves, but reflected upside down: above us there appeared an identical
it’s to double the Cape of Good Hope, circle around Africa, and lie in
treasures shining in their glass cases. Then I returned to my
escape.
“Like them, the Nautilus has run aground!”
Ned stamped his foot. Brandishing an imaginary harpoon, his hands
me over.
jewelry to the moderns, it wasn’t decisively placed in the animal
“But unless the Nautilus navigates on dry land and crosses over the
decomposed by the sea, and perhaps with mucus secreted by fish.
they’re like mullet, spindle-shaped and perfectly built for speed.”
that’s left is for me to shoulder my rifle. So where you go, I’ll go.”
fish from the order Acanthopterygia, family Scienidea. Some
deadlights, windows of biconvex glass that enabled the man at the helm
of the propeller. Fortunately this submerging movement stopped.
invented just to cause despair in decent people who ask for a little
here. When it overturned, one of these blocks hit the Nautilus as it
replied. “We’re in Europe, and before Captain Nemo’s whims take us
be over when these seas have nothing more to teach us. Everything that
waves. This dazzling carpet was a real mirror, throwing back the sun’s
shoulder!”
excellent. Nutmeg, on which these birds habitually gorge themselves,
Ned Land stared at me still more intently and finally unpursed his
species of argonaut covered with protuberances and exclusive to the
Going along the 55th meridian, the Nautilus cut the Antarctic Circle
animals—worms, insects—rode ashore on tree trunks snatched from
Gericault and Prud’hon, plus seascapes by Backhuysen and Vernet. Among
to guide that nimble skiff through those rows of reefs so ill-fated
packed them tenderly about my person. My heart was pounding
hunger of people who haven’t eaten for fifteen hours. Our appetites
“Damnation!” the Canadian shot back. “Considering the amount of gin
will take that contrivance, into whose hands it may fall? Can’t you
I tried to intervene one last time. But I had barely queried Captain
remnants of keels or undersides, bulwarks staved in and so weighed
The Last Words of Captain Nemo
woke up almost simultaneously, under the influence of this reviving
kelp from the genus Macrocystis, saturated with the mucilage their
meters down, that I spotted this cable lying on the seafloor. Conseil,
scrawled its boundary line firmly against the background of the
But once there, what tranquility we found, what silence, what peace
of paradise.
“Gentlemen,” he said in a calm, penetrating voice, “I speak French,
The waves were saturated with masses of blood. The waters shook with
was pale from some spasm of his heart, which must have stopped beating
I swear it, of a chamois or a Pyrenees mountain goat!
that interminable night of fighting for our lives.
other.”
discovered it, I ventured into it; and soon, professor, you also will
which the Nautilus hustled through these opulent waters.
15. An Invitation in Writing
“Professor,” he told me, “the simple logic of the naturalist led me to
seagoing passenger carriage had glided there on railroad tracks. And
coconut. Its globular shape, perfect clarity, and wonderful orient
Nautilus’s specimens, some peacock’s tails spread open like fans to
12. Everything through Electricity
of their leaping and cavorting, while they competed with each other in
the reflecting power of the waters! We scaled rocks that crumbled
“No, sir, but I wish you happy hunting.”
“Yes, francs! 3,000,000 francs!” I went on. “But I don’t think these
sort of circular pit. There Captain Nemo stopped, and his hand
happily, we put on our diving suits to take our turns working! Picks
This accident happened around five o’clock in the morning, just as day
“Certainly, sir.”
light on the longstanding mystery surrounding the disappearance of
and insults at them. You could feel them clinging to the submersible
well. That fabric covering you was woven from the masses of filaments
January in Europe; but the sea remained smooth and easily visible over
semiphosphorescent red porgy rolled by, a variety of gilthead that the
diverging tusks on either side.
“Go on, sir,” I replied. “I assume this condition is one an honest man
beneath the light of our electric beacon! Mushroom-shaped fungus
realm of fiction.”
the same spirit of vengeance enkindling their every soul.
personal favor to me—and I’ll bring back to the Museum of Natural
counted four of them—four men, one still standing at the helm—then a
overall effect of unquestionable candor—according to the findings of
steward whom Captain Nemo had placed expressly at my service. I got up
cruising along it for only a few miles. Through the lounge windows I
say, impossible. Captain Nemo must have spent millions in acquiring
“Where and when?”
“It’s the forest of Crespo Island,” I thought; and I was not mistaken.
attention to us, they pounced on the corpse and quarreled over every
Pretty perplexed, Dumont d’Urville didn’t know if he should give
lay to at half steam in an effort to hold steady on the waves. It must
period of anticipation before some frightful explosion. I waited, I
nothing, since right now there’s nothing we can do.”
force it down into the heart of these liquid masses.”
of leaving the Nautilus before completing our course of inquiry.
Captain Dumont d’Urville in 1827. “It’s the heartland of the blacks
END OF THE SECOND PART
because he feels life astir on every side. The sea is simply the
six to seven meters long and must have weighed at least 4,000
wish master to have whatever his heart desires.”
to bind you with your word of honor?”
“Ned Land,” the commander asked, “you’ve often heard whales
kilometers down but without ever verifying the lowest depths of this
still didn’t grasp that sign language that allowed him to chat with
It was sheer bad luck. Our noon sights were still lacking. If we
in short, a complete series of algae.
spent the day putting my notes into final form. My mind was completely
For an entire hour I was deep in these musings, trying to probe this
“No, no, Ned,” I replied in a very firm tone. “Let’s ride it out, as
The writer whose narratives record the lofty deeds of those heroic
It was about eleven o’clock when Ned Land drew my attention to a
“These two dimensions allow you to obtain, via a simple calculation,
Captain Nemo bowed. I was left to myself, lost in my thoughts. They
was beginning to break. The officers on watch rushed to the craft’s
brings those tiny animals new elements to absorb. The outcome: a
absence. Was this eccentric man ill? Did he want to change his plans
holes in the ice fields and keep them continually open; they go to
the surface of the water, the monster gave off that very intense but
“But of course,” Conseil put in, “it will be gingerbread!”
“What! Already!” Ned exclaimed.
Fifth Avenue Hotel
14. The South Pole
previously mutilated parakeet. Then they paint over the suture,
“But in a nutshell, what do you suppose is going on?”
“Master must learn patience,” said the emotionless Conseil.
escape? I felt Ned Land sliding a dagger into my hand.
4,000, 5,000, 7,000, 9,000, and 10,000 meters, and the ultimate
Finally, at noon, we were plowing the waves of the Red Sea.
little, but with my brain so aroused, I did a swift review of my whole
longer than ten minutes, and by relieving each other in this way, we
“What good would it do?” Conseil asked.
and its fresh, leafy terraces. But it was only a fleeting vision, and
“Yes, and since the atmosphere’s pressure actually weighs slightly
instant later our feet were treading the bottom of the sea.
lower shelf, then my men will put on their diving suits and attack the
itself and Nea Kameni. I was in these seas when that phenomenon
Artemidorus.”
German calligraphy.
spurred gilthead stole by with their swift thoracic fins; thread
flush with it. The surface of this long sheet-iron cigar no longer
“But,” Conseil asked, “could master tell me the cause of this effect,
An excitable conchologist would surely have fainted dead away before
remove the fifth meter. The Ice Bank’s side walls and underbelly had
ample time for this unloading, if a wretched question of trade
side walls; but after fifteen meters, the instruments were still
it into the sea.”
fearsome beak was wide open over Ned Land. The poor man was about to
signal them! Damnation! Maybe they’ll realize we’re decent people!”
could make out only its wooded mountains on the horizon, because
by the arms of a cephalopod.”
unconcern.
brightness of it. From its glare and whiteness, I recognized the
An unbearable heaviness weighed me down. Near three o’clock in the
like a soldier’s knapsack. Its top part forms a box where the air is
the northern Indian Ocean, when the Caspian and Aral Seas joined up
“You wanted to see something, Ned my friend; well, now you have
Conseil vanishes into his world of classifying and leaves real life
foot on this shore.”
crabs, rhomboid crabs, granular box crabs (easy on the digestion, as
other end was moored on board.
appearance of the diver and that chest filled with gold. Soon, from
and Vana reefs, there lay some anchors, cannons, and ingots of iron
be twenty feet long by ten wide. As for its height, not even Ned Land,
all decked out in shades and gleams. We passed freely under their
“But I’m busy, sir, I’m at work. I give you the freedom to enjoy your
My reply obviously pleased Captain Nemo. But not knowing what he was
I shared my thoughts and fears with Captain Nemo.
Brooklyn pier;* the letter read as follows:
overturned.
out.
pasta!”
“Unfortunately,” I said, “this pasta won’t stay fresh, so it seems
I tried to fight off this drowsiness. It was impossible. My breathing
whim of nature. No. They make ocean water less open to evaporation and
“All right, at noon we’ll find out what our position is!”
with the shore, to come by the materials needed for such an
classifier who supplies humorous tag lines for Verne’s fast facts; the
cover story on deep-sea exploration made much the same admission: “We
specimens of these delicate zoophytes, but they were merely clouds,
“Yes.”
shore, traveling through their double domain as their whims dictate!
the same way a father loves his child!
and didn’t leave a single point of the sea unexplored. But the evening
“Yes, Professor Aronnax,” Captain Nemo replied.
“Wait and see, Professor Aronnax,” Captain Nemo said. “We’ll show you
“Which indicates,” Conseil replied, “that we’ve spent twenty-four
knew. Under such conditions, shipwrecks had to be numerous. But
fairy tales that time has changed for me into harsh realities. I
and stippled, eyes surrounded by white dots, back, wings, and tail
“Now, allow me to finish what I have to tell you. I’ve heard of you,
the other hand, if open sea washes the pole, we’ll go to that very
now transporting you. It’s a very long cylinder with conical ends. It
drift through even the blackest nights.
informality with which I receive you, and the disorder reigning in
“Yes, last night, in a matter of minutes, we cleared that insuperable
literature were there in abundance, but I didn’t see a single work on
Captain Nemo taking us? I was unable to say. Which didn’t satisfy the
resources he tapped to satisfy his collector’s fancies, when these
whiteness of these waters.
I wasn’t sure what to think, but next to me I heard Captain Nemo’s
15’, ran its starboard quarter afoul of a rock marked on no charts of
handing us! I hope you don’t really believe in them!”
shadows on the seafloor. Past the boundaries of the clearing, the
collection. But I was given a chance to marvel at it soon enough.
circumnavigate the globe. They boarded two sloops of war, the Compass
expression. Leaning his elbow on the corner of a valuable mosaic
lovely sea anemone belonging to the family Actinidia, including among
This dose of sanity cut the harpooner’s complaints clean off.
made it a jewel of incalculable value. Carried away by curiosity, I
aground in the same strait where Captain Dumont d’Urville had nearly
location, those two volumes on the great ocean depths that had perhaps
doing all the while? During all those times I’d thought he was
laid three place settings.
be positioned on them for easy study. In the center stood a huge table
mouths as big as a gulf, which were too huge to get through the Strait
The entire day passed without my being honored by a visit from Captain
below!”
up, he yielded his equipment to another and reentered the foul air on
questionable to me.”
action. Whaling gear was set up along the railings. Our chief officer
torrents of black smoke from its two funnels.
provoked by this accident involving one of its finest steamers.
CABLE LENGTH In Verne’s context, 600 feet
double-decker ironclad complete with ram. Dark, dense smoke burst from
fail to throw his dram of cold water over us.
passed before our eyes like courtiers in the paintings of Veronese;
officer appeared. The two men held a quick exchange in their
“Everything, Conseil? No year could be that long. But what does Ned
men-of-war that let their ultramarine tentacles drift in their wakes,
betrayed the hand of man.
were quite numerous in the world’s early days, but they’re going
efforts from drunken seamen. Finally, in a much-feared satirical
“Look at this ocean, professor! Doesn’t it have the actual gift of
from the various geographical societies, etc., and in a prime
this way for some days. To anyone without my grand passion for the
plants. People mistake them for islets. They pitch camp on top, make
scales covering the bodies of our big land reptiles. So I had a
At this locality we stood in the center of a huge clearing surrounded
Would Captain Nemo head up north and beach us on the British Isles?
In 1791, justly concerned about the fate of these two sloops of war,
a few months after the new Astrolabe’s departure, the Bayonnaise
from every direction and at any speed, skewered it with its dreadful
gallery opened ahead of us. The Nautilus was brazenly swallowed
breathing became shallow and quick. I didn’t think he could stand such
lounge window by creating vacuums against it. The monster’s mouth—a
an almost imperceptible bow in return, without saying a word to me. I
“Yes, its crater, a crater formerly filled with lava, steam, and
brought up many specimens of polyps and echinoderms plus some unusual
and screeching kestrels. With all the speed their stiltlike legs could
waters.
the tongue closes off the former or the latter depending on the
Islands. On January 17, 1773, the famous Captain Cook went along the
Lighting up the seafloor even thirty feet beneath the surface of the
their output is especially prized.
“That’s one rough sea!” Ned Land told me.
underfoot there crept millipedes, bloodworms, aricia worms, and
A sudden insight into Captain Nemo’s plans had just flashed through my
Reao Island, I marveled at the gigantic piece of work accomplished by
loin of sea turtle. Similarly, here are some dolphin livers you might
and 100 feet above our heads stood the mountain peak, forming a dark
seems—that even if I had wanted to destroy all my illusions, even if I
approach. Their cautious behavior proved to me that these winged
through Mozambique Channel, perhaps off the Mascarene Islands, and
to put them in the same fish tank!”
home in rivers, lakes, and oceans, living in every clime, tolerating
this pole, which no human being had ever trod underfoot.
Strolling the Plains
and the penetrating power of the sun’s rays seems to give out only at
forty-eight hours, and its life-giving qualities were considerably
“No doubt, sir, but the error will be under 100 meters, and that’s
beneath the ice fields, it split them with simple pitching movements,
layers of air.
“Oh really, Ned! And why so?”
“As many as that?”
“And how long was it?” the Canadian asked.
Meanwhile Captain Nemo strolled from one end of the platform to the
beauty, radiance, and speed, I could distinguish some green wrasse,
rocks in this liquid setting, their lower parts dark and sullen, their
the equipment enabling it to operate, the ultra powerful force that
A MOMENT LATER we were seated on a couch in the lounge, cigars between
green, red, and blue jellyfish, and especially those big rhizostome
in its right eye.
coast. Its germ took root. Its tree grew tall, catching steam off the
words to his chief officer in their strange language, then he turned
crosswise plates of movable cartilage, between which the animals can
went through multiple drafts, struggles reflected in its several
“So,” he said to me, “the castaways built a third ship on Vanikoro
even the need for freedom, which promises me that, in exchange, our
its slumber. The Canadian went to resume his post on the bobstays
rays with startling intensity. The outcome: an immense vista of
of mammals and perhaps conceal mollusks of incomparable size or
clouds, the stormy sky gave only the faintest light to the ocean’s
from Newfoundland when it received telegraphed news from Ireland of an
permeated every part of the ship. To absorb it, we would need to fill
on the back, the second is fastened to the belt. It consists of a
launched at full speed, clearing it was the work of barely an
subbrachian Malacopterygia. These flat disks on their heads consist of
Captain Nemo gave a shout and leaped outside. We rushed after him.
accordingly. An amazing character, this boy; in midocean, this stoic
several leaving or reentering the sea. Having never dealt with man,
Nautilus’s bow and stern boasted that spindle-shaped outline that had
the Nautilus.”
returned to France, where he received a very cordial welcome from King
with down, rose over its tail, which was lengthened by long, very
arrived at the perpendicular face of that high wall. How the ship
I admit that my heart was pounding. Lord knows why, but I saw a
disturbed by the presence of these man-eaters than soldiers in an
“Captain, I fully understand the excellence of sodium under the
“That question deserves an answer,” Captain Nemo replied. “First off,
As for fish, they always filled us with wonderment when, staring
grave. Captain Nemo, arms crossed over his chest, knelt in a posture
was rewriting my book on the great ocean depths in the midst of its
I stared at Conseil. Ned Land rushed to the window.
“Finally, the naturalists of antiquity mention some monsters with
in the hands of savages in the Louisiade Islands and New Caledonia.
wall seemed to signal the end of Atlantis, of which, all in all, we
squid, and other devilfish, the oceans will have become huge centers
whales. I recognized the southern right whale, its head squat, its
had heeled sideways, filling completely, and it was listing to port
lines of the coast with greater distinctness. Fairly flat to the east,
seizure kept haunting me. I was incapable of connecting two ideas in
There I found Conseil, who wanted to know the upshot of my interview
afraid to guess at how long it might last. Little by little, hopes I
Captain Nemo had commented, we were arriving in these waterways a
always it bumped against this surface that formed a ceiling above
pounding hideously, gearing up for futures full of incurable
I don’t think it’ll pull through like that first time in the Torres
time you will be too. Anyhow, we’ll be armed, and on our way we might
The vessel was two miles off. It drew nearer, always moving toward the
bituminous coal and in places covered by wide carpets of sulfur. The
that vegetable life disappears more quickly than animal life. We know
able to follow that course. The lounge is at your disposal, and with
advancing cautiously so as not to awaken its adversary. In midocean
Several times that day, the Nautilus repeated the same experiment and
rid the seas of it. The man was a sort of Knight of Rhodes, a
“This convoy was supposed to put into Cadiz, but after learning that
vertebrae, and it numbers two more ribs than its relatives. Floating
Just then a huge cave opened up in our path, hollowed from a
Captain Nemo appear, lift his spyglass, and inspect the horizon.
These thoughts were clearly readable on my face; but Captain Nemo
“Then, since you’ve already mentioned the crossing of the Israelites
quick succession, at the risk of stripping its gears, and it didn’t
THREE SECONDS before the arrival of J. B. Hobson’s letter, I no more
from the least attentive on board. Snatching only a few minutes for
“Game with four paws, Professor Aronnax,” Ned Land replied. “All these
“No, in a church,” Conseil replied.
the same individual. Captain Nemo did not appear.
expectations, the Nautilus definitely began to move backward.
numerous than birds in the air, these fish raced right up to us, no
“And with my own!” the harpooner replied simply.
intense that an involuntary terror sweeps over me, and my lungs still
Kameni and Palea Kameni. I wanted to offer you the unusual sight of an
Ceasing all movement for an instant, we listened. And it may have been
was summoned by The New York Herald to formulate his views no matter
escarpment, I could see no volcanoes within a radius of several
loveliest mirror ever to reflect its image.
form of a choice between two alternatives.
preoccupied. Then, contrary to custom, he ordered that both panels in
with long jaws, excellent animals twenty-five centimeters long and
place.”
To be sure, the monotony of life on board must have seemed unbearable
swift. You could feel it in the vibrations of the long steel hull.
back, wonderful Japanese mackerel from the genus Scomber with blue
liquid, secreted by a pouch located in its abdomen. It blinded
For several hours that day, I wielded my pick doggedly. The work kept
this boat has the rigidity of iron; no rigging to be worn out by
they’re eaten fresh, dried, marinated, or salt-preserved, and in olden
of the fish that populate this liquid element, or better yet, the
Captain Nemo’s companion picked up the animal, loaded it on his
the Nautilus was resting, ten meters down.
south, the log that it was traveling at a speed of twenty miles per
amazement.
much air each man consumes in the act of breathing, and he can compare
Islands. “You observe that I’ve entered the new islets in their
A hideous collision occurred, and thrown over the rail with no time to
pyramids. In their dark crevices huge crustaceans, aiming their long
CHAPTER 17
The captain’s fingers then ran over the instrument’s keyboard, and I
So those millions had been delivered to their address. At what spot on
Longipennes (long-winged) family, whose discordant calls sound like
“No, my boy, and this whiteness that amazes you is merely due to the
left this place of devastation with prodigious speed, 100 feet beneath
ship, which was looming larger on the horizon. Whether it was English,
“Don’t you understand,” he went on, “that the congealing of this water
“But rest assured,” I added, “that between passengers, seamen, or
100 degrees centigrade = boiling water
all.
But this hard substance could have been a bony carapace, like those
else. Well versed in the theory of classification, he was poorly
full in three days and was shining brightly. Once we were aboard that
Ocean. Here I saw no fine-grained sand, no underwater prairies, not
“But,” I said, “getting back to pearls of great value, I don’t think
and two copper swivel guns.
filling little by little, and the Nautilus sank gently beneath the
Captain Nemo’s personal insights were denied me, because that
nor the Orient. It’s a kind of nicotine-rich seaweed that the ocean
monster had been sighted in latitude 42 degrees 15’ north and
the waves of the Pacific.
it something other than a maritime accident that had dragged this
did we do that’s so praiseworthy? Not a thing. It was a question of
stern.”
continents, then I’d share your alarm. But we now know that Captain
shadows.
the proportionate reduction in volume that salt water experiences in
and he’s ready to keep score.”
this communal resting place on the inaccessible ocean floor!
what I gathered from their differences in tone and gesture.
Nautilus. The outside door had been left open, and Captain Nemo closed
punctured tract of ice; and finally, carried away by its supreme
silence we waited for the outcome of this scene; Conseil, in spite of
“Precisely.”
aquarium!”
proved perfectly amenable to going with us.
“You’ve convinced me of one thing, Mr. Naturalist. That deep in the
this would have gone on without the catastrophe that ended our
usual single slit adorned with a gill cover, an order consisting of
Lucullus.
“If master will permit my saying so,” Conseil replied, “I never
“Most of these dishes are new to you,” he told me. “But you can
“I thought,” I said, “that the formation of such new islands had come
west of the cape, make for Pacific seas, and complete its tour of the
everything I loved, cherished, and venerated—homeland, wife, children,
or the pious village of Eusebes, whose gigantic inhabitants lived for
circulation of blood in animals.”
So the floor of this sea had the appearance of a battlefield where
dimensions equaled the one I had just left.
feeling an odd short-windedness in my chest. It was becoming hard for
chalky nor stony but actual bone. Sometimes this armor takes the shape
front of the little harbor of Vana, located in latitude 16 degrees 4’
was spindle-shaped and swollen in the middle, a fleshy mass that must
if the Nautilus doesn’t right itself, which I’d regard as a real
avowed intention to imprison us forever on his ship justified our
degrees 15’. At noon, while the chief officer was taking the sun’s
communication with the crew’s quarters. Four men appeared and, not
Nemo replied. “Did your study at the museum afford you such a perfect
great marine mammals—your mind should easily accept this hypothesis of
“You and your companions must be placed in confinement until I see fit
I drew Conseil’s attention to the considerable growth of the cerebral
coxswain took the tiller. Ned, Conseil, and I found seats in the
right.
finally, archerfish with long, tubular snouts, real oceangoing
holes are in the second order. Finally, those pearls for which one
turn their dorsal fins into watered silk; their hues are confined to a
counted in a single female?”
Everyone knows that fish make up the fourth and last class in the
miscarried. Then, pertinent to this:
had sighted the animal again, three weeks before in the northerly seas
some fairy-tale monster, but a man who had sworn an implacable hate
not stir.
Our lights produced a thousand delightful effects while playing over
very distinct groups of supporters: on one side, those favoring a
Vanikoro. Traveling in the lead, the Compass ran afoul of breakers on
hooflike spiny oysters piled on top of each other, triangular coquina,
movement. Brought to full speed, the propeller made the sheet-iron
water. Fortunately its speed was not excessive.
your guide.”
our exact position and fix the starting point of our voyage. It’s
spotted with white and covered by fringed mantles, nudibranchs from
could heartlessly watch it change color from cinnabar red when alive
jolt. It’s easy enough to accept that prodigious things can come from
CHAPTER 18
electric equipment, the Nautilus’s interior defied the most intense
snow was piling up in such packed layers, it had to be chipped loose
Canadian, the Anglo-Saxon, the Humboldt, and the United States, all
with enormous tails, dull, glassy stares, and phosphorescent matter
me:
After leaving these delightful islands to the protection of the French
Captain Nemo invites Professor Aronnax on a hunting trip that will
lounge.
teeth in our gunwale and lifted the longboat out of the water as a
shellfish. Some of these pearls were bigger than a pigeon egg; they
Two hours after leaving the Nautilus, we had cleared the timberline,
openly resumed its northbound course, after raising the Bahamas at the
tiniest noises inside the Nautilus, when Captain Nemo entered. He
opened before me.
The Canadian didn’t even bother shrugging his shoulders. Attacking
Norwegians express it!
gray color is mixed with red spots; they’re enthusiastic eaters of
leaps,” witty writers in the popular periodicals parodied it,
causes of this odd phenomenon. Luckily I was in a position to answer
Meanwhile I was carefully examining these unleashed breakers. They
than I that nature doesn’t violate good sense, and she wouldn’t give
incomprehensible language, and either the chief officer had been
bushes of moving flowers, hedges of zoophytes in which there grew
or the animal kingdom. As for the tableware, it was elegant and in
origin. They bear no government seal of approval, but I imagine
they had saved it for me, and while they were suffocating, they poured
sweep of the ax, opening the belly, ripping out the heart, and tossing
ray, scaly featherbacks with brown crosswise bands, greenish codfish,
“I don’t know how to thank you, sir, but I won’t abuse your good
were built along such lines that I never suffered from this
THE NEXT DAY, November 9, I woke up only after a long, twelve-hour
staggers the mind!
flexible, able to assume any position, and can be operated from inside
“That seems to be the gist of it,” I said, rereading the letter.
“Hunt them? What for?” Captain Nemo replied. “Simply to destroy them?
scientist caught in an ethical conflict; Conseil, the compulsive
degrees 4’ east of the meridian of Greenwich; its length is 275 miles;
the Antarctic Ocean to open sea at the pole. Our progress was
standard fare. Like actual snails, we were at home in our shell, and I
“Are you a physician, Professor Aronnax?”
even to mussels, to whom nature has not denied all talent for
rays. But the depths were deserted. Fish didn’t linger in these
“Yes, sir.”
meters, denoting a thickness of 1,200 meters, of which 300 meters rose
off by the Libyan coast! But soon the Nautilus hugged the eastern
ligaments, let it dry out in the sun, and leave it to harden inside
value that I haven’t time to describe completely. Among these exhibits
On January 4, two days after crossing the Coral Sea, we raised the
the law for everyone on board the Nautilus. But what’s your diagnosis
Since he made no allusion to his absence the past eight days, I also
unearthly, extraordinary, and inconceivable expedition, whose true
which he planned to depopulate of its every edible quadruped. But he
The Nautilus’s men attached to each fish’s tail a ring that was big
that swayed from one tree to another, startling the fish that flitted
visited by Mr. Darwin and Captain Fitzroy. The Nautilus cruised along
miniature statues in marble or bronze, modeled after antiquity’s
have been counted in one five-square-millimeter space, so also have
human beings, creatures like himself, were near him under the waters,
I followed Captain Nemo. The hatch closed, the ballast tanks filled
emotion, repeated twenty times over, kept us in a state of
a shelled animal, and give a conchological yell, in other words, the
cheerful, when I heard someone climbing onto the platform.
Captain Nemo was in his stateroom, he might see me. But, not hearing
to establish one supreme impression in my mind. I stayed there an
the command of Admiral de Chateau-Renault, because by that time the
“And I still don’t believe it!” the Canadian shot back.
I stared in silence at the high, sheer wall we were skirting just
your underwater forests; but how a piece of red meat, no matter how
light feathers of wonderful fineness, and they completed the costume
Meanwhile, to avoid running aground, the Nautilus halted three cable
sound of a cannon, and which shelters a few leafy date trees here and
We then plowed the waves of the Indian Ocean, vast liquid plains with
of the Pacific.
and nourishes them. In place of leaves, most of them sprouted blades
The nets were hauled on board. They were a breed of trawl resembling
“That doesn’t necessarily follow. There are certain Fulton-style guns
it seemed to me that Conseil’s shout had received an answer back.
finished saying mass, this rock started moving and went back into the
On January 25, the ocean being completely deserted, the Nautilus spent
first day of Creation.”
“Right,” I said. “Ned promised us cutlets, which seems highly
account. This outrageous animal had to shoulder responsibility for all
chance served me well.”
We all three stood up, rifles to our shoulders, ready to answer any
“Ned my friend,” Conseil replied, “had you ever heard of the Nautilus?
For a good while the Canadian had said nothing more to me about his
informed them of the captain’s decision. I’ll let the reader decide
or sleeping in his cabin. A hundred times I chided him for his
presence of myriads of tiny creatures called infusoria, a sort of
clams and venus clams; the trellis wentletrap snail from Tranquebar on
mindless hunting that soon will destroy them all, since their hunters
turn into continents. Among the echinoderms, notable for being covered
tentacle was writhing in the air. But just as Captain Nemo and his
coral tree forms that, according to Sir James Clark Ross, live in
the many heads of Hydra. At every thrust Ned Land’s harpoon would
that, like the Nautilus, would return to the surface of the sea to
But Commander Farragut didn’t want to waste a single day, or even a
what.
before the retina when sunlight strikes it too intensely. It took some
back—perhaps very soon—to more civilized shores. I expected Ned Land
intersecting lines and russet spots standing out sharply against a
lying on its starboard side, completely stationary to boot.
on this island, I’ll eat tiger—tiger sirloin.”
“Gracious!” Conseil put in. “Suppose one day some volcanic upheaval
“Ah!” I exclaimed. “I see our captain’s way of life! He’s found
“I’m certain of it.”
I followed Captain Nemo, who, via one of the doors cut into the
unreasoning terror run through me. Conseil stayed calm. Ned Land
“There it was an issue of obtaining fresh meat for my crew. Here it
near the 43rd parallel; one, helped by the northeast trade winds,
same place, dividing my wonderment between the storm and this
“No matter how faintly it shines, it will be enough for me,” the
longboats to sea?”
passageway had disappeared. Searching with care, Captain Nemo soon
unaware of Dillon’s activities, had already set sail to search
vanished into the darkness.
been named in a report by one Captain Hunter as the site of the Count
1. The Indian Ocean
be repeated, then would you accept?”
“These cetaceans,” he asked, “are they as big as the ones in the
the boundaries of the Aru and Papuan Islands, was missing from this
“We’ll go with you,” I said. And we followed Captain Nemo, heading to
“What is it, Conseil?”
creating a gentle rocking motion, now ceased. Had the Nautilus left
mile from the Nautilus.
of these objects were shaded with all seven hues of the solar
contemporaries of early man had walked! My heavy soles were crushing
only in a layer of rust, plus anchors, cannons, shells, iron fittings,
Midnight was approaching. The waters were profoundly dark, but Captain
their tail. I recognized the Javanese eel, a genuine eight-decimeter
sailors and officers. With panting chests and anxious eyes, we each
It was a library. Tall, black-rosewood bookcases, inlaid with
climb onto the platform, and his usual phrase would ring through the
departure.
piece equal in surface area to the Nautilus’s waterline. This meant
“They’re southern right whales,” he said. “There goes the fortune of a
“On that note, professor,” Captain Nemo told me, “you and your
horizon. The presence of this furnace under the waters had me
arrangement of their limbs. But their lower jaws lack canines and
an enormous cetacean, and you ought to be the last one to doubt it
batteries.”
know that the crew of the Royal Navy’s Bulldog fished up a starfish
animals didn’t flee so swiftly that our electric capsules couldn’t
were set at a 45 degrees angle to the Nautilus’s waterline. Then the
themselves “out-and-out fools” for being hoodwinked by a fairy tale,
fellow student. Starting this very day, you’ll enter a new element,
circumstances that have been handed us, just to walk in the midst of
“Professor Aronnax,” he said to me, “are you ready to start?”
I share Maury’s view, and I was able to study the phenomenon in this
order. Those not slipping through the sieves pierced with 100 to 800
didn’t reply. Moreover, the panels opened just then, and the outside
continent whose very existence has been denied by such philosophers
“It seems to me,” Ned Land went on, “that it wouldn’t take much of a
heart-shaped cockles, and especially some sea butterflies with oblong,
trying to sever its earthly ties. I listened with all my senses at
It was obvious to me that this Mediterranean, pinned in the middle of
down the hatch and back through the gangways to my stateroom.
and for certain, if they hadn’t been controlled by numerous natural
Europe, and from this insight I concluded that the ship would take us
secretes it without the animal sticking to it.
on March 21, it will be easy to get our bearings if the noonday sun
and two men appeared.
with a speed double our own.
then.”
long—you could still assert that this phenomenal creature greatly
as certain pious women believe in the leviathan from the Book of
elements of fire and water, a struggle ending in King Neptune’s
“Surely, but of great use to the world at large,” Captain Nemo
mollusks, no more zoophytes, no more articulates. Just a few large
“Good work, men!” the Canadian put in.
service in such work.”
The Nautilus’s nets hauled up several types of sea turtle from the
equinoctial America. Like turtles, armadillos, sea urchins, and
its precious metals. He was the direct, sole heir to these treasures
awl-shaped auger shells, some of those Persian murex snails that
was gradually covered with mother-of-pearl. In any case, comparing
rose again. The needle on the pressure gauge swerved over its dial.
eight o’clock in the evening, after the lights of Fire Island had
“Because,” I said, “if I can trust my hunches, if I truly understand
Steller’s sea cow. Harmless and unaggressive, these fine animals were
for them. Only, I’d like to know what you mean by a ‘happy year’ under
You’ve made it to the Ice Bank, which is already far enough, but you
“But I rarely encounter him. He positively avoids me.”
During the night of February 16-17, we entered the second
parts of the Pacific, where in all likelihood its species will soon be
crests so compact they didn’t foam. They kept growing taller. They
tooth as hard as steel. Some of these teeth have been found buried in
shellfish are spread out on mats made from the esparto grass that
it. Now then, it was precisely this familiarity that we needed to
their waists. I looked to see if their appearance might draw some of
who will never leave each other.”
This struggle had lasted a quarter of an hour. Defeated, mutilated,
CHAPTER 15
that has created the islands in this ocean.
other open-sea plants, all without flowers. “It’s an odd anomaly in
the sea inside its most dreadful whirlpool, that the Nautilus has
“Captain, I hear you, but I can’t believe my ears.”
down with seashells and barnacles, they couldn’t rise to the surface
The Nautilus had drifted into the midst of some phosphorescent strata,
The Mediterranean in Forty-Eight Hours
during the night in latitude 27 degrees 30’ and longitude 72 degrees
strength gone, nearly unconscious. My gallant Conseil felt the same
darkness of the waters. It was the Nautilus’s beacon. Within twenty
still deeper. I could feel its sheet-iron plates trembling down to
outlined to match the ship’s waterline. Next the ballast tanks filled
Mr. Land, you’re addicted to tall tales! What sperm whales you’re
down the Amazon or the Mississippi, numerous pieces of wreckage,
“We’ll deal with them later.”
every nation, shaded by every flag in the world, and ending in those
them, joining them together, are iron T-bars that give this ship the
so dense and compact a craft’s stempost couldn’t tear through it
needs? Perhaps. Or, proceeding in a more convenient, more economical,
attention. You would have thought it was some ruin enshrouded in a
At certain turns in the trail we were going along, the lake appeared
with greenery from its beaches to its summits inland, crowned by
and they indicate my position and exact heading in the midst of the
on this sea bottom one of those underwater towns Captain Nemo dreamed
Just then, resting his hand on my shoulder, Captain Nemo said to me:
me the depth at which my submersible is sitting.”
passing over these turbulent depths. A few have heard hollow noises
provided a second carapace? Where had nature learned the secret of
water plants, I noted various seaweed: some Cladostephus
The next morning I climbed on deck. Captain Nemo was already there. As
that’s denied us. He’s obsessed by his old memories and it’s breaking
Captain Dumont d’Urville ran aground in 1840 and nearly miscarried
the ocean. But if I exhaust all my wonderment on them, I’ll have
completely decked over, absolutely watertight, and held solidly in
19, the lounge door opened. Captain Nemo appeared.
After crossing a pretty lush prairie, we arrived on the outskirts of a
of fire already cut into by the edge of the horizon. From the heart of
On January 27, at the entrance to the huge Bay of Bengal, we
we were breathing fresh air on the surface of the waves.
extremely high prices?”
thickets and long alcoves from some fantastic school of architecture
especially some gudgeon two decimeters long, sprinkled with whitish
mind clear, my brain go on the alert. So I began a careful
“Are you a physician?” he repeated. “Several of your scientific
Like the continents, the sea has its rivers. These are exclusive
Cruz Islands, and put in at Nomuka, one of the islands in the Ha’apai
odd voice.
“That collision threw you overboard along with me?”
per hour, broke over heads of coral emerging here and there.
relentlessly that they took refuge in the ocean basins of the high
“Every animal may be overstating it, but in truth I doubt we could
of certain mussels from rivers up north; in short, several specimens
But the ship didn’t stay long in these heavily traveled waterways. It
“I don’t believe a word of it,” the Canadian replied.
holding on by their muscular disks, providing a literal flowerbed
“Captain Nemo,” I said, “I’ll vouch for the results and not try to
number of fish in the vicinity of Suez. I slipped copper rings around
Canadian passed up the decorative in favor of the functional. He
well along, but a very dense morning mist shrank the horizon, and our
frigate. I felt I was done for.
like the one he had left planted at the South Pole.
Port-au-Prince, and Duke of Portland had perished, and the island
to the south and east: an immense shore, a chaotic heap of rocks and
coastline. The Falkland Islands were probably discovered by the famous
But this futile search couldn’t drag on much longer. The Abraham
the watery mass. Not a single detail was visible. In four minutes it
Conseil added, “think how we’ll look down on those pitiful land
from Gueboroa Island. As for the savages, they went back to shore near
Born in the French river town of Nantes, Verne had a lifelong passion
So saying, Captain Nemo unfurled a black flag bearing a gold “N” on
thought. An idea visibly crossed his mind. But he seemed to brush it
On January 1, 1868, bright and early, Conseil joined me on the
this excursion to the polar continent, I could hear the calls of
“But how were you able to build this wonderful Nautilus in secret?”
found out! Certainly I had no complaints to register with him, on the
cetacean a strength in proportion to its size while enlarging its
“Well, sir?” he said to me.
Captain Nemo called out. A steward appeared. The captain gave him his
undergo a highly varied accentuation.
The lad was thirty years old, and his age to that of his employer was
episode in this body of history.”
had to be deserted.
dinner bell.”
“You’re examining my shells, professor? They’re indeed able to
didn’t recognize him. His facial features were transfigured. Gleaming
drawn up by officers on the French frigate Normandy, dead-earnest
but here they’re built by volcanic phenomena. Look, sir! Look at the
practical application. When master has told me these animals’ names
agility I couldn’t equal, and which would have been envied by hunters
the Blessed Virgin. Subsequently, at the beginning of the 18th
“Kindly be seated,” he told me.
coldly.
needed to ask whether Captain Nemo would be coming along. I likewise
under the abdomen to the rear of the pectorals but aren’t attached to
elevation, and if Captain Nemo hadn’t made a rash promise, the
Falkland seas. Some of these jellyfish were shaped like very smooth,
to ’em.”
nostrils, earns them the nickname of sea unicorns; lastly, a couple
“Borings will tell us that. I’m going to ground the Nautilus on the
a death worthy of himself, seeking to be struck by lightning. In one
stuck his dagger vertically between the shells to discourage any ideas
patches were spreading over its surface, announcing the imminent
him at work. It seemed obvious to me that this man didn’t understand
stood up, went right to the Indian, quickly cut the rope binding the
brain. “What excellent game, especially in a stew! What a supply for
companionway and climbed onto the platform.
the wrinkled roughness of some natural arch, or some overhang
starting point in the seas of Japan. Before the Nautilus’s spur there
into the liquid mass. I was mistaken, and after a hasty examination I
few meters above the waves, Captain Nemo’s companion took aim and
could do everything that circumstances permitted. Several times I
of 1,600 atmospheres, in other words, 1,600 kilograms per each square
engineer. The engineer raced over.
“Professor Aronnax,” he told me, “this calls for heroic measures, or
dreadful harpoon. Barely twenty feet separated him from the motionless
The zoophyte branch offered some very unusual specimens from its two
But while observing these different specimens of marine fauna, I
He hadn’t finished speaking when a cracking sound occurred. The nuts
toward New Zealand, dropped anchor at Calcutta on April 7, 1828, and
encompassed it myself? Didn’t I lead ten months of this otherworldly
crowned the receding bottom of this part of the Atlantic by a height
don’t realize that various accidents, caused by collisions with your
people of Provence. The philosopher Diderot has very aptly claimed
caved in, and I fainted. . . .
Just then, ignoring my presence, the captain opened this cabinet, a
marine vegetables, which gives them an exquisite flavor; hence these
daydreaming that through our metal carapaces, a little polite
Conseil, nor I. The nutritious food, life-giving air, regular routine,
Professor Aronnax early in this novel. “What goes on in those distant
like hounds atop a wild boar in the underbrush. But by forcing the
Indian Ocean. Also it’s likely that a sixth current used to exist in
sensation of cold rising from my feet to my chest. Apparently a
no doubt had come to gather what he could before harvest time. I saw
and east to west between America and Asia over an expanse of 145
they didn’t run off at our approach, and I counted enough of them
a two-volume work, in quarto, entitled The Mysteries of the Great
worried that these gentlemen will stave in walls that shells from your
a prison and its prisoners still prisoners. But, taking advantage of
eyes.
navigating it by night. This, he claims, is a sea subject to fearful
of quicksilver.
prehistoric times? Where was I, where had Captain Nemo’s fancies taken
of infection, because their waves will no longer possess “these huge
silently. Captain Nemo filled me with insurmountable horror. Whatever
76 degrees 8’; on the 28th at 77 degrees 32’; on February 2 at 78
“Master must close his eyes! Master mustn’t look!”
“Not quite, my friends!” I replied. “It was the tide, merely the tide,
“So it’s an issue of . . . ?”
on display.
“How, Conseil?”
was content with a dozen of these fascinating marsupials, which make
stayed between 400 and 500 meters deep. It was obviously shrinking,
and take aim with his rifle; then, after sighting down its barrel for
without any possible contact with the open air!”
inexplicable glow that several captains had mentioned in their
minutes later, we were floating on the waves of the Atlantic.
each other by garlands of tropical creepers, genuine natural hammocks
CHAPTER 4
“With that minor addition,” Conseil replied, “these fowl would make
this spot the sea covers entire forests that sank underwater in
on my behalf, if you want.”
“Partridge family?” Ned Land asked.
“That’s just where you’re mistaken, professor,” Ned replied. “The
“We’ll escape!” I exclaimed.
F. P. WALTER University of Houston
or by repeated collisions, its center of gravity rises. Then it
foggiest inkling that sailors’ luck was about to bring me face to face
that lack pelvic fins and are covered by a heavy, often glutinous
France’s old extremist newspaper, The Constitutionalist.
with one of those devilfish I’ve heard so much about, which can drag
Nautilus did not stir. I fell asleep with the firm intention of waking
“Then I’ll continue. Here’s what came to pass. The tradesmen of Cadiz
paddlefish whose tails are covered with many scaly rings; snipefish
Near one o’clock in the morning, I was overcome with tremendous
windows measuring no less than twenty-one centimeters at their
sunken galleons. The company’s investors were lured by the bait of
wasn’t made above sea level.”
encounter. I knocked on his door. I received no reply. I knocked
“No doubt, but there are others with no doubts who believe to this
“Thoroughly abominable, Professor Aronnax. The Greek and Latin
“An unusual assortment of devilfish,” I told him, as carefree as a
in with their indestructible cement.
Just then the door to the main lounge opened and Captain Nemo
gobies, etc., plus a thousand other fish common to the oceans we had
books on natural history. He had thumbed through my work on the great
“Well, Ned my friend, we’ll serenely wait for the tide on the 9th,
trails seemingly known only to himself. The seafloor rose noticeably,
wealth has been lost, where so many victims have met their deaths!
“Nautron respoc lorni virch.”
today. Reasonably enough, it’s assumed that today’s whales are smaller
animals swim wonderfully thanks to their flexible backbones, narrow
“What if we never return to it?” Ned Land added.
pulled abruptly back to the surface of the sea, and yes, I heard these
so impeding
- KILOMETER Roughly 6/10 of a mile
and it’s made up of some sixty subgroups, among which we noted the
the mollusk’s body. This noose slid as far as the caudal fins and came
“What organization?”
“Yes. Where are we?”
contained such wealth?”
measured up to fifteen meters in height over a length of 150 to 175
Preston. On July 4, 1779, as a member of the squadron under Admiral
After that, I stopped objecting and started obeying, since resistance
more abundant cerebral matter. Accordingly, seals are quite capable of
after the Great Eastern, the biggest ever to plow the seas. So in 1867
captain was still strolling there, his steps agitated. He stared at
fearsome commotion out in this huge seaweed.
Nautilus’s sides.
“Besides,” I mused, “all roads lead home to Europe, and our unicorn
future generations the fruits of my labors—figuratively speaking, by
waves. I saw no more of the small intervening billows that form in the
experiments, on the degree of salinity in waters of different depths,
Suddenly my clothes were seized by energetic hands, I felt myself
the aid of Heaven and Commander Farragut.
“I imagine not,” I replied, “but he won’t want to sample them.”
“How unusual!” the Canadian put in, setting aside his tantrums and
wardens,” Ned Land added.
ship brings back an average catch of 4,400 fish, making
this sea could have been strewn with reefs.
must admit he took a definite liking to me. No doubt it was my
manatees, which belong to the order Sirenia, like the dugong and
Syria, isis coral from the Molucca Islands, sea-pen coral, wonderful
sword hilt bearing the imprint of characters engraved with a cutting
to guests on the Nautilus?
“This man will be dead in two hours.”
CHAPTER 15
down in an odd manner, and very unpredictable in its ways, it
“Oh, sir,” he told me in a voice trembling with excitement, “I’ve
them; but he remained mute and emotionless.
soon crackling merrily. Meanwhile Conseil and I selected the finest
“Maybe, but you won’t come back!”
“If it’s in a mood to listen to you, Mr. Land,” I replied in a tone
This time there could be no mistake! A human voice had answered us!
long, superb jacks handsomely embellished by seven black crosswise
“Conseil!” I repeated, while feverishly beginning my preparations for
common to all ocean water, and there we’d brave with impunity the -30
“Excellent!” Ned Land said.
gallery whose gentle slope took us to a depth of 100 meters. The light
“Yes, sir. Our propeller is jammed. I think the horn-covered mandibles
been counted in thirty cubic centimeters of water. And the power of
prawns, and ghost crabs) Conseil mentions some common spiny lobsters
happens in the polar regions, it seemed that night and day no longer
The blizzard lasted until the next day. It was impossible to stay on
day with me. They were astonished at the captain’s inexplicable
“They’ll be useless to us,” he replied.
take us to the northernmost seas with incomparable speed.
CHAPTER 12
which jutted from the stern of the platform, I got set to scour that
threatening again. He stood up, pacing in circles like a wild beast in
centimeters long that rose under the waves like hands ready to grab
our just-determined longitude and latitude intersected.
our cell.
chest maroon to brown. Two strands, made of a horn substance covered
muddled and misled the minds of seamen in both hemispheres, was, there
“Not too terribly,” Ned Land replied, “and no more than if I told you
indiscreet in asking you all these things?”
insensitive to exhaustion as our steam engines. But no such luck. Hour
railing, he was flung backward by some invisible power, lord knows
accomplish this? Obviously your batteries could do the extracting; but
As I said, Captain Nemo wept while staring at the waves. His grief was
“Yes,” I replied, “because we’re going in the direction of the sun,
“They sure did go on, those oldtime bishops!” Ned Land said.
three colors of the French flag, Montague blennies four decimeters
this land right under my eyes, furnishing its own unimpeachable
shell. Once immersed in water, all these objects lost a part of their
quickly, dressed, and went into the lounge.
“Abominable, Ned my friend,” Conseil replied. “But when a little glass
monogram with its motto Mobilis in Mobili.
Marquesas Islands. Three miles off, in latitude 8 degrees 57’ south
the seas.”
abundant. And this was the ocean that I was first destined to cross
the coral concretions and carpeted the ocean floor. It served as both
when there’s better food around.”
certain Commander Bowen, aboard the Albemarle, alleged that rubble
out of man’s reach, and I corner the game that dwells in my underwater
“There’s something serious afoot,” Conseil said, “and it bodes well.”
degrees centigrade; but after the wind had lulled, this temperature
for inhalation and exhalation now feed to that sphere.”
a frequently raging sea in a frail skiff was a race to certain
pressure. I felt only a certain tightness in the joints of my fingers,
that had crossed my path since I went overboard from the Abraham
speak, I wanted to rip off the copper sphere imprisoning my head.
valley is made picturesque by mountains that furnish these underwater
Abraham Lincoln, was fitted out for putting to sea as soon as
“Ah, professor, you’re full of ideas today!”
For a quarter of an hour, I trod this blazing sand, which was strewn
But Captain Nemo gave no orders. Would he wait for nightfall and exit
“The two hulls are manufactured from boilerplate steel, whose relative
bag of pearls from a pocket in his diving suit and placed it in the
disposal. There are scientific treasures here, and I’ll take advantage
spur. I could hear scratchings and scrapings. Carried away with its
I was about to open it when a gasp from Captain Nemo nailed me to the
lookout. This island seems uninhabited, but it still might harbor
(1872) and Michael Strogoff (1876) are closer to “travelogs”—adventure
him. His eyes were focused on the northern horizon, along which the
troughs of the big crests. Just long, soot-colored undulations with
like the disgorgings of a Mt. Vesuvius over the city limits of a
in the interests of mealtime.”
or smarter than the Abraham Lincoln captures this den of buccaneers,
Just then, leaning over the forecastle railing, I saw Ned Land below
gone down south only to replenish his sodium supplies. So I hoped he
“Yes, sir. But giving up that intolerable earthly yoke that some men
“Sir,” he answered me, “I have chronometers variously set to the
was excellent, no different from cow’s milk.
aspects of your life that are surrounded by involvements and secrets
a flash, and I was sure the lad hadn’t missed a thing, because he
the globe had failed. Besides, the season was already quite advanced,
ever discovered any traces under the waters of that great historic
vigorously it left furrows in my flesh. I half opened my eyes. . . .
suddenly come back toward me. With his powerful hands he sent me
tiniest sounds were transmitted with a speed to which the ear is
Oman at various speeds and depths. It seemed to be traveling at
stared at the devilfish, and said a few words to his chief officer.
Bougainville, Cook, McClure, and Thomas Forrest, by Rear Admiral
would now hug the coasts of Europe and America, which would allow the
Red with blood, motionless by the beacon, Captain Nemo stared at the
feet, or 1,000 times greater pressure, it’s 17,568,000 kilograms; in
obvious that Captain Nemo wanted to carry out his underwater program,
always and invariably indicated 4 degrees centigrade. I merely
piece of flint on the sea bottom. The hole grew longer, wider, and
“You’re in command,” I answered, gaping at him. “But may I address a
That’s how we ended this conversation, which later was to have such
Roque to find favorable winds for doubling the Cape of Good Hope. The
“What’s the meaning of this?” I exclaimed.
our slumber, the steward had cleared the table. Consequently, nothing
I then related the evening’s incidents to the Canadian, secretly
arranged into fan shapes, mermaid’s cups that looked like the caps of
underwater region!”
wouldn’t have chased and cannonaded an underwater boat as readily as a
heating it, meanwhile absorbing the carbon dioxide with potassium
amorous advances of his stepmother Phaedra, and giving the creature
other species, the Phyctalis protexta, native to this part of the
recover my composure.
acquiesce; but if we couldn’t attain our end through force or cunning,
forever in control of himself, looking neither alarmed nor annoyed.
“Bah! My friend, there’d be many more without their enemies,
bursting. I closed my eyes. I no longer wanted to think. A half hour
“Well then,” I replied, “if you don’t want to welcome them aboard the
Captain Anderson called an immediate halt, and one of his sailors
the Nautilus’s spur cut the waves of the Gulf Stream while its
Half an hour later, guided by its electric trail, we reached the
had to share their dominion with huge herds of marine mammals that
this flesh, skillfully dressed by the ship’s cook. I found it
I complied. Since I could no longer hold my tongue, I let it wag. I
“Master has never been more generous,” Conseil replied.
could be no escaping it, an even more astonishing phenomenon—a
At a depth of ten meters, we walked amid a swarm of small fish from
entrails were dressed with brains of peacock, tongue of flamingo, and
I’d been delayed by a quarter of an hour or even less, the frigate
there weren’t a connection between the two seas. If there were, its
acetabuliferous (in other words, a bearer of suction tubes), with the
reefs, the solid element’s last exertions against the liquid element,
We walked by ourselves, genuine loiterers stopping or straying as our
“Oh well,” the Canadian said, “we’ll give him the slip long before
measured only a few fathoms, and soon we reentered Our Element. I
“Which one?” I asked.
isthmus—”
From rubbing shoulders with scientists in our little universe by the
On a bed there lay a man some forty years old, with strongly molded
“Not quite, professor,” the Canadian replied. “We need some fruit to
proceeds of their hunting, and they had miscalculated. Luckily, and
slanting fins. The Nautilus would do long, diagonal dives that took us
and saltwater scallops—briefly, all those that secrete
been gloomier, more withdrawn, less sociable. He seemed to be avoiding
indifference with contempt. For Conseil, the captain was still a
This Homeric slaughter dragged on for an hour, and the long-skulled
to stop, and the frigate merely coasted.
the coral of Oceania, the cannibals of the Pacific, only to perish
“Whatever detour master wishes.”
This last attempt ultimately misfiring, the two strangers exchanged a
“He’ll be a superman.”
into effect. The fruits of your research must not be lost. But the
genuine sago palm forest. A few harmless snakes fled underfoot. Birds
accustomed to this unique gloom, and in these circumstances I
places of Japan, and I went below again to the main lounge.
exactly what I experienced, and make doubly sure of everything I
“As master wishes,” Conseil replied serenely.
colossal barriers, I thoroughly amazed him by saying that scientists
of sea and sky, but the panels closed. Just then the Nautilus had
skillful with his hands, efficient in his every duty, and despite his
VERNE’S TITLE
“I’ll chase that animal till my frigate explodes!”
plans because I didn’t want to push him into an attempt that was
increased beneath the seas of the Torrid Zone, so the disease spreads
“Thank you, Conseil. Only I must ask you to postpone the question of
Our baggage was immediately carried to the deck of the frigate. I
I had climbed onto the platform just as the chief officer was taking
Having nothing better to do, I decided to dredge these beautiful,
were as startled as I was.
enormous serpents that, until then, had frequented only the seas of
“Very little of it,” I replied.
the French government fitted out two large cargo boats, the Search and
By May 15 we were off the southern tip of the Grand Banks of
The valves were charged. More coal was swallowed by the
this name hints at its semiliquid flesh, because it’s Latin meaning
hesitation, “since you’ll never leave this underwater boat. Come into
from top to bottom with one swift stroke. Then he briskly undressed me
in significant proportions. Now then, it’s this sodium that I extract
sheet iron, using the monkey wrench he had with him. After likewise
and even this discomfort soon disappeared. As for the exhaustion bound
northern Pacific Ocean; which meant returning to France by way of the
molten lead or from masses of metal brought to a white heat—flashes so
the Pacific, where his Nautilus could navigate freely and easily? Time
whale fishing. Its deck paneling opened, the skiff was wrenched from
the surface of the ocean? Was it reentering the motionless strata deep
As for Ned Land, he didn’t say a word, but his wide-open jaws would
motion, heat, and light to the Nautilus but even protected it against
a harpoon.
authoritative. His specifications for an open-sea submarine and a
before the arrival of Jacques Cousteau and technicolor film.
teamed up, trying to crush the Nautilus with their sheer mass. Through
changed without becoming any easier. Pudding stones and trachyte gave
unwilling to attempt this tortuous passageway and maneuvered instead
degrees 22’, a good 150 leagues from the nearest coast. It wouldn’t do
from the most civilized countries as well as the most undeveloped
confess that I inhaled it with delight. The soul of a flower is its
slender, and armed with an extensive jagged sting; small one-meter
Madagascar. From its mass of greenery, huge globular fruit stood out,
our globe. I want to see what no man has seen yet, even if I must pay
Pasture, this squadron fought an encounter with English vessels. Sir,
coffers. They even mention one oyster, about which I remain dubious,
coach on an express train. As for the foregrounds passing before our
ordering their contemporaries never to give the lie to nature by
Captain Nemo, and carried the fellow away with irresistible violence.
of credibility and fly off into fable or legend. Yet for the
“Yes, professor,” the captain replied.
yet decomposed. With a supreme effort, she had lifted her child above
another forty-eight hours, our reserve air will be used up.”
We waited, we listened, we forgot our sufferings, we hoped once
captain’s knowledge. But in midocean it was unthinkable.
“But, captain, believe me—”
our arrival.
“You’re familiar with the composition of salt water. In 1,000 grams
The Canadian leaped up the steps, but I stopped him. A well-known
mooring the skiff, we reentered the Nautilus’s interior.
mentioned, together with the flat island they stand on; and a few
bodies and silver heads, glittering azure goldfish whose name by
mass execution? Will the waves someday deliver that manuscript that
Conseil looked at it with purely scientific fascination, and I’m sure
will lead to the world putting its foot down. At least I hope it will.
boot.”
to set foot on this floating islet.”
“After tomorrow,” he said, “the air tanks will be empty!”
that gave our position as longitude 51 degrees 30’ and latitude 67
of wine, bread, and meat isn’t suitable for an upstanding Anglo-Saxon,
slaughtered the whole horde, if he hadn’t been so busy talking! But he
and yellow spots.
perfectly cut out for racing, their heads small, their bodies sleek,
and sound, were at my bedside clasping my hands. We embraced each
expressly designed to bear considerable pressures. They were like
“You glutton,” Conseil replied, “you’re making my mouth water!”
feet of water ahead or astern of the Nautilus. All around us, this
mine, Captain Paul Bos of Le Havre, has often sworn to me that he
that came together again at Moses’ command:
seal liver whose flavor reminded me of pork. Then I went to bed; but
were black and glistening like those of Nubians. Beneath their
research and no longer entered the lounge.
world flora. This family produces both the biggest and smallest
“From what country is that ship?”
whose females supply a meat highly prized, slipper lobsters or common
chime snapped me out of my musings. I shuddered as if some invisible
There our diving suits were removed, not without difficulty; and
5. At Random!
. . . ?”
The water was rising. Those poor men leaped up into the shrouds, clung
treading this polar soil, it’s because no human being until now has
Instantly one of those long arms glided like a snake into the opening,
The latter returned from time to time to breathe at the surface of the
Just then the chief officer drew the captain’s attention anew. The
“Come on, Conseil!” I told him. “Here’s your last chance to pocket
“In any event we’re already clear,” the Canadian replied, “because
swell considerably on the beach. It was likely that they had come from
pointless to pitch in with “Ah yes,” “Exactly,” or “How right you
For many, then, this book has been a source of fascination, surely one
however, that it would close behind him.
beneath the seas. In spite of everything, this strange man hadn’t yet
experience. Spyglasses functioned with feverish energy. A supreme
leadership had been most injudicious.
ship can no longer steer.”
Conseil couldn’t believe his eyes, and he questioned me about the
tanks and shoot a few spouts of fresh oxygen through the Nautilus’s
concluded that if this island wasn’t inhabited, at least human beings
degrees and 6 degrees south, and between longitude 174 degrees and 179
They were the actual military orders given by France’s Minister of the
these figures but still not willing to give in.
me. Twelve miles away, Cape St. Vincent was hazily visible, the
sarcastic “happy hunting.” On top, the suit ended in a collar of
I reentered my stateroom, very puzzled, as you can imagine. I tried in
“I figure that after visiting these unusual waterways of Arabia and
these waterways, strewn with islands and plowed by steamers, probably
decently devour their prisoners. However, I’m opposed to being
the low latitudes, and besides, once the Nautilus was submerged, it
I both desired and dreaded it. I listened for footsteps in the
dare to tackle the English Channel? Ned Land (who promptly reappeared
neighborhood, that’s another story! I know that in certain countries,
“Correct, Conseil.”
ice, among them Ned Land, easily recognized by his tall
approached the thermometer, consulted it, and turned to me:
of basket sponges, chalice sponges, distaff sponges, elkhorn sponges,
was an immense torch that lit up the lower plains all the way to the
midst of the calm waters.
very clear recollection of my sensations during it.
permeability, or resistance to saturation.
“There,” he added, “out there lies true existence! And I can imagine
Then, in a gentler voice, he went on:
propelled into a little room adjoining the wardrobe. Towed in the same
charms of cannibalism!”
It then occurred to me that if Ned had chosen these waterways for our
“But we know that it’s certainly gifted with great speed. Now then,
knew far more about it; and since he and Ned were now fast friends, he
they eat around here? Turtle livers, loin of shark, dogfish steaks?”
Lincoln’s stempost hadn’t even cut the suspected waters of the
a flooding ship that had been forced to sacrifice its masting. But it
commit a reprehensible offense. Thus they’ve already depopulated all
bottom of the sea.
have nothing to fear from the fury of this gulf, despite the contrary
a propeller—and the boat started to move. We barely had time to hang
plaice, dab, and brill, simply because of the dizzying speed with
superman. We’re in the Mediterranean. Fine. So now let’s have a chat
to the buoy-rope of a cork float. The Nautilus had to maneuver
couldn’t even guess. So I had to give up any notions of questioning
it’s a warship. Here’s hoping it pulls up and sinks this damned
But whenever the Nautilus drew near the surface, those denizens of the
steamer churning the waves of the gulf with noisy blades.
each clung with its tough mass of filaments. And how many of these
the day before, Captain Nemo came to take the altitude of the sun. The
This bread was excellent, I must admit, and I ate it with great
daylight I was expecting, I found that I was surrounded by total
panels opened.
alarm, because the air tanks are full.”
Gueboroa Island.
I withdrew. From that day forward our position was very strained. I
belonged to the order Sirenia: marine creatures that legends have
“So it’s outside?”
soil, its iron tip sometimes giving off sparks when it hit a stray
Poor Conseil had assaulted an electric ray of the most dangerous
approached.
privilege reserved for mankind, but I don’t allow such murderous
I can’t deny it; the commander’s words had a tremendous effect on
was indicating.
jaws.
known by the name velp and boasting four-foot leaves, was crammed into
islands to windward. Turtles came to lay their eggs. Birds nested in
stirred, because I obviously would have felt its hull vibrating under
stir up a cooling breeze, scarlet rosetangle, sea tangle stretching
greater energy, and their electro-motor strength is twice that of zinc
else! His heart still throbbed for suffering humanity, and his immense
kingfishers lurked along the watercourses, but they didn’t let us
“Electric?”
Sheer chance had placed us in the presence of this squid, and I didn’t
discussed the question in its every aspect, both political and
chief officer rushed at it, the animal shot off a spout of blackish
“But,” I went on, “for secreting pearls, the ideal mollusk is the
Stream, which, as it leaves the Gulf of Mexico, is barely different
The next day, March 19, at five o’clock in the morning, I was back at
predators couldn’t get away. Several times ten or twelve of them
which nature has ground only black and white pigments, feather-shaped
aquatic world in prisons made of thread. So we were never lacking in
the waters of the Pacific.
the sea, making the waves leap to prodigious heights.
Some thirty pictures by the masters, uniformly framed and separated by
your body is tolerating the pressure of one more atmosphere, in other
these conditions, one-tenth of it does emerge above water. Now then,
on this viscous seaweed carpet, and without my alpenstock I would have
undamaged. Had it run afoul of an underwater rock or the wreckage of
Land in latitude 70 degrees 56’ and longitude 171 degrees 7’ east; on
needed, Captain Nemo came to withdraw these millions to ballast his
shred!”
glow did not recede gradually—but all at once, as if the source of
“These composers,” Captain Nemo answered me, “are the contemporaries
“That’s all, Professor Aronnax, and the calculation is easy to
latitude 53 degrees and 56 degrees south, and between longitude 67
rate of twelve to thirteen meters per second, he could hardly make use
Our navigating continued under these conditions until March 13. That
then a few tufts of genus Corallina, some green and others red,
out such punishment. He had made me, if not an accomplice, at least an
spur.
Monodelphia, class Mammalia, branch Vertebrata.”
During the night, in line with my forecasts, a new one-meter slice was
our lips. The captain placed before my eyes a working drawing that
latter-day Sir Dieudonné of Gozo, on his way to fight an encounter
that I extract from a marine slug, the Mediterranean sea hare. The
“Aha!” the Canadian put in. “This beast offers the added luxury of
“One that leads the Nautilus on a cloudy night within a short distance
white, slightly flaky flesh, whose liver, when separately prepared,
complication to Captain Nemo.
I’ll be forever grateful.”
magnificent phosphorescent phenomenon. After involuntarily closing my
I consulted the pressure gauge. Much to my surprise, it indicated a
we’re in mine, I intend to speak up. Before a few days are out, I
language in which they were written, and this jumble proved that the
Another resident of these seas caught my attention and revived all my
“Oh!” he exclaimed. “It’s not just one whale, it’s ten, twenty, a
admitting I had turned forty.
for easy navigating. So I had assumed that Captain Nemo, in adjusting
What an indescribable sight! Oh, if only we could share our feelings!
both were knowledgeable about fish, but from totally different
Walruses resemble seals in the shape of their bodies and the
gloriously with his gunshot. Hit by an electric bullet, the pig
adventures erupt almost at random. Yet this loose structure gives the
the moderate pace of fifteen miles per hour.”
seven-tenths of the planet earth. Its breath is clean and
CHAPTER 16
I found a place near him and waited without speaking. Noon arrived,
One after another, reports arrived that would profoundly affect public
unusual object I picked up was an auk’s egg of remarkable size, for
sodium, but it’s only a mild inconvenience. In any event, every
featured much noise but little action.
“It’s true,” I replied. “Your ship is a century ahead of its time,
“Your friend Conseil,” the fine lad replied serenely, “has nothing to
which gives the temperature inside the Nautilus; the barometer, which
“A cannon going off,” Ned Land replied.
Bayonnaise under Commander Legoarant de Tromelin, who had been
fifty, a hundred?”
chiefly the cod species, which I detected in their waters of choice
away, half discolored by mist.
harpoon again and again into the gigantic animal, which imbedded its
before my eyes.
souls!
“While hunting?”
you’ve published on the great ocean depths. I’ve pored over it. You’ve
process of forming, which, given time, will someday close off this
two-volume work, in quarto, on The Mysteries of the Great Ocean Depths
happened, who knew if we might not hit the underbelly of the Ice Bank
efforts that its final lunge was about to flip it into the sea. But
its odd appearance. I recall seeing the bay of El Tur completely red,
the beats of our propeller getting faster, and we picked up speed.
By then it was eight o’clock. The air inside the Nautilus should have
saw lying on the seafloor, some already caked with coral, others clad
told Conseil the story of the Atlanteans, who had inspired the old
nowhere. We could hope for nothing from the Nautilus’s commander but
J. B. HOBSON,
had no choice but to continue its voyage. By then it lay 300 miles
an aurora borealis.
historians can find nothing to say in its favor, and the Greek
before the indomitable resistance of the Hellenic people. Centuries
ever again?”
As for the articulates, in his notes Conseil has very appropriately
Mexico or the Caribbean Sea. Yet there was no shortage of water under
place!”
maximum?”
difference is it to me? I didn’t go looking for him! I don’t keep him
polypary inferior even to coral. Its animal nature isn’t in doubt, and
“Yes,” Ned Land repeated, “so long as we get out!”
better conditions. Its sheaves of conducting wire were insulated
water.”
reflections that penetrated every liquid molecule. Will anyone believe
curving southward is the coast of Egypt.”
fifteen fathoms. This bottom was completely different from the one I
hole it had made in the hull.
countless minarets and mosques. There, a city in ruins, flung to the
arms over his chest, and observe the sea. What could he be looking for
The skiff headed southward. The oarsmen took their time. I watched
Another unusual effect. Heavy clouds passed above us, forming and
mindless, barbaric bloodthirstiness of fishermen, the last baleen
Island was visible for barely an instant at noon while the chief
I returned to the lounge, dreading yet desiring an encounter with
To say Canadian is to say French, and as unsociable as Ned Land was, I
“In person. Welcome aboard, professor. Your cabin is waiting for you.”
constant temperature we didn’t even have to worry about catching
And now, how can I convey the impressions left on me by this stroll
for five days! And all remaining breathable air had to be saved for
transparency impossible to convey. An hour later we were at 13,000
have been sheer insanity to think of escaping!”
“My friends,” I said, “it’s time. Let’s shake hands, and may God be
from the mollusk branch. There I saw a collection of incalculable
the Nautilus would resume its underwater excursion, and I was getting
a hermit crab inside the shell of a whelk.”
During prehistoric times, an era of fire was followed by an era of
eyes, as if they were already missing a limb or two. Should I alert
the complete Arago, as well as works by Foucault, Henri Sainte-Claire
“Here I’m naturally led into telling you how the Nautilus is
virtues. I was well satisfied with my cabin, which was located in the
hang the destinies of nations! I also observed some wonderful snappers
Just then we went around the highest ridge of these rocky foothills
leave a single point unexplored from the beaches of Japan to the
As for the fish in these waterways, I noted various species that I
from one extreme to the other. Something was out there, that much was
metal sphere. But before proceeding with this operation, I asked the
Suddenly the clock struck eight. The first stroke of its hammer on the
my hide!”
Lakes. Now, whether or not their crossing was literally miraculous,
In essence, over a period of time several ships had encountered “an
to exhausting lengths, their crews managed to dredge up an anchor
litter of bones that made a dry crackling noise. So what were these
whole stretch of sky and sea.
on the surface of the ocean. Furthermore, I heard the sound of
limestone of these waters, this wreckage must have spent many a year
expression.
understand French.”
a height of 100 meters, they sink only to a depth of 300 meters. And
still warmer, following the itineraries of herring and sardines. We
with the question chiefly from this viewpoint. The Shipping &
The Red Sea
In Latitude 47° 24’ and Longitude 17° 28’
scientists and discoverers as engineer Simon Lake, oceanographer
sheet-iron plates of a steamer.”
could dispute his ownership of this underwater property? What other,
by, throwing off phosphorescent glimmers.
soundings have been able to reach them. What goes on in those distant
diving suit, I was crossing through the liquid mass in a temperature
life, he who had no desire for our modern one? I would have given
directions as we approached the southern magnetic pole, which doesn’t
just barely. Their intense brilliance had been followed by a reddish
sculpted blocks, whose every angle, ridge, and facet gave off a
“My friends,” I said, “we mustn’t despair. We’ve gotten out of tighter
“Oh, I could produce the air needed on board, but it would be
The temperature was fairly low. Exposed to the outside air, the
I watched these experiments with the most intense fascination. Captain
expressed it, a latter-day Galileo, or maybe one of those men of
“Bravo, captain!” I exclaimed. “But in the midst of the waters, how
The islanders were still there, in greater numbers than on the day
I stared at my companions. They were armed in the same fashion, and
anticipate future events and technologies: From the Earth to the Moon
floor of this prison lay hidden beneath thick, hempen matting that
The day I expounded this theory to Captain Nemo, he answered me
There, in place of natural wonders, the watery mass offered some
there.
the Scotia.
of vinegar is worth 1,500,000 francs, its taste is a small price to
Creasing his brow, lowering his lids, and puckering the corners of his
I was lagging behind some twenty paces when I saw Captain Nemo
your permission, I’ll take my leave.”
creatures. Argonauts, so common in the Mediterranean, voyaged here in
it. Ten meters away, I could see its gaping hull, into which water was
moored alongside. The night was still dark. Layers of clouds cloaked
I went over to the captain.
consisting of only one family. Example: the lamprey.”
“No argument, sir, since our craft breathes in the manner favored by
it’s dinnertime?”
profile of this upside-down mountain chain that stretched beneath the
approached the animal and attacked it with blows from harpoons and
several fruitless attempts, the crew managed to slip a noose around
for me, I was in ecstasy over the verve of their movements and the
whose parallel winding shores form an immense perimeter fed by the
radius kept growing smaller and smaller. The skiff, still attached to
I repaired to my stateroom. Conseil returned to his cabin; but the
empties into that gulf, and the St. Lawrence is my own river, the
free play of the imagination. The human mind enjoys impressive visions
he says nothing of the crayfish subdivision that includes the true
Near five o’clock a torrential rain fell, but it lulled neither wind
tapiro were much in demand by the epicures of ancient Rome, and their
hull. So everything’s ready. I’ll see you this evening.”
taken as far as this zone by the Gulf Stream. This is one of the
regrets. Here he no longer had the ease of movement and freedom of
change with tremendous speed as the animal grew irritated, passing
search of refreshing shade from the hot tropical sun, and they did
lad seemed right at home!
“Damnation!” he exclaimed. “These people are about as hospitable as
returning to breathe at the surface of the water like a cetacean,
“But my companions and I would be willing to safeguard this
into the classic sin of Pride. He’s swiftly punished. The Nautilus
weevers known in Aristotle’s day as sea dragons and whose dorsal
I couldn’t answer him. I clutched his hand. I squeezed it in an
rolling and pitching on the waves; no sails for the wind to carry off;
cold water at will.
and 9 degrees 49’ north, and between longitude 79 degrees 42’ and 82
of the pleasure of your company.”
emerge above the waves.
“This inexplicable phenomenon is thus explained away—unless it’s
the waves! Had some sailor on board lived to tell the story of this
and hadn’t heard me. Determined not to leave without questioning him,
hold, who climbed on deck yelling:
between the two gulfs. It was Mt. Horeb, that biblical Mt. Sinai on
alcyon coral belonging to the species Procellaria pelagica, also a
“Gracious,” Conseil put in, “a choir of bulls?”
brought up by our nets. Among others I noted some long-finned
much to his surprise, Conseil pulled off a right-and-left shot and
to make a mockery of them!”
to capture this bird is simply the unadulterated truth; but he fared
And in the bow of the platform, Captain Nemo unfurled a black flag,
These words pronounced, the chief officer went below again. I thought
“That’s all?” I answered. “The Nautilus has huge air tanks; we’ll fill
devoted watch on his friend every instant.
country whatever, China or the Congo, no matter how far off it was. He
fish, anchovies, sea bream, porgies, garfish, or any of the chief
familiar with their uses. But no doubt these others answer pressing
some kind of underwater boat that, as far as I could judge, boasted
“Stoke up more steam, sir, if you can. As for me, with your permission
here.”
“Correct, Professor Aronnax,” the captain answered me. “But I imagine
eyes: a genuine kaleidoscope of red, green, yellow, orange, violet,
successively added to its assets the Arabia, the Persia, the China,
hand? And isn’t steel surer than lead? Here’s a sturdy blade. Slip it
how to exchange thoughts by means of prearranged signals! So, for lack
Conseil and I barely glimpsed. There were whitish eels of the species
eagle rays, swarms of seahorse looking like knights on a chessboard,
surface of the waves.
other belligerent machinery, but sailors and scientists—to say nothing
the surface, then instantly diving again.
cubic meters; in other words, it was to weigh only that same number of
“Savages.”
“Great Scott!” Ned Land put in. “And where, if you please, will we be
degrees 26’. On February 1, 1831, the Englishman Biscoe discovered
hadn’t observed until then: the common sponge.
in brown and yellow, finally schools of wonderful red mullet, real
sieves, that are pierced with different numbers of holes. Those pearls
hovering above the muddled masses on the seafloor, sometimes grazing
of cowry used as money in India and Africa; a “glory-of-the-seas,” the
free to follow his instincts. But to my mind, this hypothesis
observed that in the upper layers, the water was always colder over
usually spherical or pear-shaped. The spherical ones are made into
museums and collectors in Europe.”
bottom rises almost all at once. It forms an actual ridge with only
granted to Commander Farragut. His provisions were loaded on
molten a river of iron solder as big as the Amazon or the Missouri.”
geography, geology, etc., held a place there no less important than
antenna bar my path, or saw some frightful pincer snap shut in the
These various types of shrubbery were as big as trees in the temperate
“Sir,” Ned went on, “let’s suppose that by some impossibility, Captain
THE NEXT DAY, March 22, at six o’clock in the morning, preparations
and in one of those seas whose tides are moderate, an inconvenient
flew up with tremendous violence, obviously pulled open by the suckers
No, yet here it is! So don’t shrug your shoulders so blithely, and
buds known by the name trichodesmia, 40,000 of which are needed to
At six o’clock I ate supper, but I had no appetite. Despite my
“And you, Ned, who have such good eyes,” I added, “you can spot the
features, the very image of an Anglo-Saxon.
“Clear,” I replied.
During the course of the next day, April 12, the Nautilus drew near
most valuable shell in the East Indies; finally, common periwinkles,
executed under a pressure of thirty atmospheres.
myself.”
arm. To the south and east, heads of coral were already on display,
meters long; and finally, air tanks 7.5 meters long and extending to
altering the scenery like the changing landscape in a diorama.
fresh particles. At the same time, I felt a swaying, a rolling of
Then, going on with his conversation:
with these daunting Andaman aborigines.
were visible. Electric light flooded this whole harmonious totality,
“He didn’t tell you anything else?”
a complete collection of the individuals in this group.
“I wouldn’t bet on it!” I replied.
of Ceylon, that pearl dangling from the lower lobe of the Indian
. . . !”
some unforeseen circumstances would prevent Ned Land from carrying out
electric light in the middle of the North Sea, glass panes less than
in a large number of seas and even in certain streams, where they’ve
“Oh bravo, Conseil!” I exclaimed.
a torture undreamed of by even the wildest savages! I felt like I was
How long I was sunk in this torpor I cannot estimate; but when I
24. The Coral Realm
the billows.
“Ned Land can think, attempt, or endeavor anything he wants, what
fish only from an edible viewpoint.
aquatic residence go about it? Did he obtain air using chemical
“Excellent, really excellent!” the harpooner exclaimed, interested in
Yes, this had to be the case, and undoubtedly they were now chasing
would have gone without me, and I would have missed out on this
light. Our prison lit up all at once; in other words, it filled with
it.”
island and built a smaller craft with rubble from the two large
ever, kept repeating to me in a calm tone:
long with a sharp sword jutting from the upper jaw, bright-colored
wealth is safer than in any national treasury.”
this sea, captain, can you tell me how it got its name?”
and I had no doubt that he intended, after doubling Cape Horn, to
Wearing caps made of sea-otter fur, and shod in sealskin fishing
of the skiff. Leaving the Nautilus under these conditions would have
lit. This was due to the reflecting power of the walls of ice, which
This whole fearsome sequence of events appeared in my mind’s
like a lake of blood.”
struck by lightning.”
an electric ray!”
will never navigate again, on the seas or under them. It’s only fit to
interests, could I go back on my word and be responsible for ruining
timing with which dolphins hunt these fish. Whatever the range of its
wide stripes.
In the midst of the waters, a man appeared, a diver carrying a little
I set foot on the platform and waited. The darkness was so profound I
architecture. Why had our incomprehensible guide taken us into the
historical topic was soon explained.
The note was worded as follows:
I was in dread the latter would give way to some violent outburst that
Remorse or regret? For a good while these thoughts occupied my mind,
March, since it’s the equivalent of October in these latitudes, was
escape. There I would encounter him one last time. He would see me,
“Oh really?” Ned said, tipping me a wink.
metal headgear, and they could neither hear nor reply.
plateau where still other surprises were waiting for me. There
existence? Thus to that question asked 6,000 years ago in the Book of
dreadful state of affairs. But we faced it head-on, each one of us
of South America. By then we had fared 16,000 leagues since coming on
were undergoing a pressure of ten atmospheres. But my diving clothes
of paradise stole off at our approach, and I was in real despair of
Captain Nemo didn’t reply but signaled me to follow him to the main
losing ground. I no longer knew what arguments to put forward on my
the seas near Queensland, very hard to come by; exotic cockles from
of the business, I confined myself to a flat “no comment.” But soon,
press took potshots at feature articles from the Geographic Institute
“Tertio,” Conseil replied, “The sturionians, whose gill opening is the
catching one when Conseil, walking in the lead, stooped suddenly, gave
speed. I realized that it was letting the warship approach. Moreover,
Egyptian capital of Sais, a town already 8,000 years of age, as
Captain Nemo went in. We followed him. My eyes soon grew accustomed to
beach, attesting that the natives had no thoughts of leaving it.
But no sooner had I peered into the eyepiece than the instrument was
sun-worshipping reputations since no sunlight ever reached them; their
islands. In some places, they form atolls, a circular ring surrounding
very element. Would I ever again have such an opportunity to observe
tanks of salt water, then they’re opened up and washed. At this point
of this shore seemed to bear out Commander Maury’s hypotheses. In
immediately. Soon the Nautilus reentered its liquid element, and the
I’m at the South Pole.”
could depend only on ourselves. Besides, for some time now the man had
extend my stay in the lower strata for as long as I want.”
me, you and your companions are simply passengers on the Nautilus.”
intimidate!
gradually climbing its gradients.
Side by side, Captain Nemo and I walked directly toward this
plunge into a squid’s sea-green eye and burst it. But my daring
and stretched him out on the seafloor.
Fifteen days later and 2,000 leagues farther, the Helvetia from the
sit on the summits of mountains or volcanoes submerged a few feet
working. Look at the needle on the pressure gauge. It indicates that
“Very seriously,” the Canadian replied.
observe the full series of these wonders gathered under the seas of
his tall figure, which stood out in black against the glowing
CHAPTER 6
that the fifth compartment had been invaded by the sea, and the speed
classify them into five divisions. The tiny microscopic animals that
At ten o’clock in the evening, the skies caught on fire. The air was
sail nor shore. A breeze was blowing noisily from the west, and
Captain Nemo continued to plummet into the dark depths of this forest,
While I was observing this phenomenal creature, two jets of steam and
the movements of the man-eater, which thrashed about with
their jagged double stings, silver-backed skates, common stingrays
had reduced speed. By then it was rising to the surface, but
days, land animals (quadrupeds, apes, reptiles, birds) were built on a
surface of the water, and conversely, more oxygen than nitrogen when
went from passageway to passageway, always proceeding south.
heavy mists, we couldn’t see from one end of the platform to the
them! What swarms!”
worldwide excitement caused by this unearthly apparition. As for
By then we were forced to go back down to the beach because the ridge
waves, and then it would be not only possible but easy to escape.
escort. Dreadful animals that teem in these seas and make them
fellow man.”
begin these substructures, which sink little by little together with
of Cape Horn. We were abreast of the tip of South America by March 31
again we didn’t have to deal with monsters of the deep.
foot. Obviously it was some hard, impenetrable substance, not the soft
struggle, from this sea that had devoured one of its own!
them, if not to fly, at least to spring into the air; spatula-shaped
them. But under these conditions, wear and tear were almost
There the ocean floor formed a valley 120 kilometers wide, into which
arbor of marine plants belonging to that superabundant algae family
the sea when you’re almost certain to meet man-eaters in the
halfway between plant and animal. But I must say that naturalists are
under fearsome pressure, supporting other trees that supported them in
accomplished.
Langle, were sent by King Louis XVI of France on a voyage to
“Yes, if we’re close enough to shore and the ship’s afloat on the
Every eye looked toward the point indicated.
“Ugh!” the Canadian put in with distinct scorn. “You can keep the
these devilfish are, what vitality our Creator has given them, what
“My gallant Ned,” I replied, “for poets a pearl is a tear from the
the Japanese city of Tokyo, then went that same day at 700 kilometers
of light, like those seen inside a blazing furnace from streams of
be cut in half. I ran to his rescue. But Captain Nemo got there
as we passed and pressed familiarly against our feet. These were auks,
Mate, man the gun in the bow!”
their coral cemetery!
Just as we were crowding each other to reach the platform, two more
whom I hadn’t alerted, mistook it at first for a gigantic sea snake
hadn’t gone to bed. With his every movement I imagined he would appear
giants—next to which such land animals as elephants or rhinoceroses
“There’s the thing in question, astern to port!” the harpooner
By then the darkness was profound, and as good as the Canadian’s eyes
CHAPTER 20
barely heard me, and his lack of interest in any commentary on this
obliquely by crossing their pincers over their carapaces, finally
he receive our demands for freedom? At the very outset and in no
beneath their huge arches, my eyes were instantly struck by the unique
would certainly have given me away if Captain Nemo had seen me.
stateroom. I heard the sound of footsteps. Captain Nemo was inside. He
equator, so many fascinating or frightening incidents had beguiled our
breathe on board?”
animal seemed to be wonderfully proportioned in all three dimensions.
Just then Captain Nemo appeared on the platform. He spotted the
of this impressive landscape, Captain Nemo was leaning his elbows on a
giving us some fine autumn days. It was the Canadian—on this topic he
these crumbling masses were covered with an enamel polished by the
broke up. I was about to proceed with a careful examination of the
inhaled the sea’s salty aroma with great pleasure.
surface, struck it head-on or slantwise, hacked at it or tore it, and
*Italian: “The Fish.” Ed.
saying goes: “He who catches them doesn’t eat them!” Finally, adorned
from intense blue to olive green depending on the depth. The
“Spoken like a true glutton,” Conseil replied. “But tell me, are you
“Is there any immediate danger?”
fine-grained sand was followed by a genuine causeway of smooth crags
The gloom was profound. I glimpsed a black mass disappearing eastward,
started!
So the Nautilus hove before the entrance to the world’s most dangerous
Near seven o’clock we finally surveyed the bank of shellfish, where
pale. My companions came over. I clutched Conseil’s hand. Our eyes
I asked Captain Nemo if he had observed any fish at more considerable
rift in the clouds, the chief officer took the orb’s altitude. Then
“Not unlike Captain Nemo,” Conseil replied sagely. “Which is why he
reader decide whether the Canadian’s appetite was aroused by the sight
The Canadian turned swiftly at these last words.
“While hunting.”
Aboard the Nautilus
his tunnel, and I stood beside him in the pilothouse while he steered
There some ten men were standing by for the assault, armed with
scaling rocks, straddling fallen tree trunks, snapping marine creepers
“Yes, my boy,” I replied, “they’re sometimes found here.”
stirred by your deeds of courage and genius, we’ve had to stifle even
because its propeller was in check and no longer furnished any forward
The Canadian properly skinned and cleaned it, after removing half a
“And who says it will circle Africa, professor? What’s this talk about
the shallowest spots near the bank of shellfish. Instantly the skiff
one of the shores of this globe, professor, and you’re surprised to
Cephalopoda?”
I didn’t answer the Canadian. I wanted no arguments. Deep down, I was
this confined bay? A month from now in this very place, the numerous
aground. Just as Conseil was about to jump ashore, I held him back.
this new stroll and equipped with our two devices for lighting and
What was he doing just then? I listened at the door to his
“This is the Avenger!” I exclaimed.
The fine lad thought this only natural!
backward-curving stings, serpentine moray eels with silver tails and
of Orpheus, because in the annals of the dead, all chronological
Other subtleties occur inside each episode, the textures sparkling
addressing me directly, as if to drive away an ugly thought:
for mollusks, they consisted of exhibits I had already observed:
red salmon seemed to mow the waves with their slicing pectorals; and
nature long ago made what man today is making on its surface.”
inquisitive, dreads it.
need to use that talent. So if the beast does exist, it’s already long
Near five o’clock in the afternoon, we sighted Cape Ras Mohammed to
“What land is it?”
countryman on board, perhaps several! I’ll hear his harrowing plea the
more.
Passage. Three seconds after reading this letter from the honorable
tried to enforce their rule as far as Greece, but they had to retreat
thought so.
making a clean sweep of some palm cabbages that had to be picked from
In the midst of this hopelessly tangled fabric of weeds and fucus
paintings by Gerard Dow, Metsu, and Paul Potter, two canvases by
from each other and could instantly take in nearly a quarter of the
fell to the seafloor, toppled by the enormous mass weighing him
magnificent sea fans that fashion one of the most luxuriant tree forms
the Ice Bank to find more feasible seas. As for seals and walruses,
permission to hunt—”
only at the surface of seas or rivers, but a minority can dwell at
reader decide whether eyes got proper exercise aboard the Abraham
riveted plates.
“Right,” I said, tipsy from all these wonders, “nothing to it!”
again lived on board in seclusion.
huge storage lockers.
that Oedipus regarded the Sphinx.
“I keep coming back to my idea. We’ve got to talk to the captain. When
discussion between just the two of us. I’ve talked, you’ve
pieces, as if he were making firewood; later he would extract the
“No, Professor Aronnax. It just rides with the waves, but otherwise it
could jeopardize our escape plans, if we had promising circumstances
the same! We have a commander who’s game for anything!”
“Secundo,” Conseil went on, “the abdominals, whose pelvic fins hang
Arriving within a few cable lengths of the cetacean, our longboat
frigate couldn’t breach?”
Bransfield stopped at 65 degrees. That same year the American Morrel,
this Nautilus.”
classified by science. No naturalist, neither Cuvier nor Lacépède,
These rocks were hung with huge weeds, immense sea tangle, gigantic
. . . ? Gone are the days when Jonahs took refuge in the bellies of
home. He’s in master’s employ, he thinks like master, he speaks like
thought the Nautilus was about to attack. But it was content to let
“Look here,” I went on, “as yet there’s no cause for despair. We’re
We were prisoners once more, unwilling spectators at the performance
olive shell rolls from left to right!”
variety in the species of sharks proper. It was more than twenty-five
it’s in this last group that narwhales are placed. Each of these
rays. Above and below, the Ice Bank was subsiding in long
whales”), beasts with wrinkled bellies and huge whitish fins that,
combined.
eyes. I’m going to make another underwater tour of the world—perhaps
conversation skimmed various subjects, and without being more
enemy. This compulsion leads Nemo into ugly contradictions: he’s a
steamer on the San Francisco line sailing from California to Shanghai,
northernmost seas!
on the Spaniards. Reigning more or less poorly under the name King
the underside of the body, which make good house pets like certain
means of some contrivance left to the luck of winds and waves. In
“Professor Aronnax,” he answered me, “I don’t know what kind of
walked straight toward it, and we were back on board just as the first
“In a church!” the Canadian exclaimed.
Nemo didn’t put in an appearance.
dugong. He understood the Canadian’s frame of mind and addressed him
no avail because the carbon dioxide produced by our breathing
years older still. This original city of Athens, ninety centuries old,
“You talk about sperm whales,” he said, “as if they were little
temperature of 4.25 degrees centigrade, which at this depth seemed to
their every ribbon, frequenting the shores of this great nation where
Ned Land whistled “Yankee Doodle” between his teeth, stuffed his hands
train. Suddenly, all the way from the dark horizon where it had gone
The Devilfish
I stood up, went, leaned on my elbows before the window, and I saw it.
surface of the ocean, and safe and sound, it left behind the dangerous
slate-colored bodies, white undersides, and lemon-colored neck bands,
if I can believe a certain Copenhagen professor who says that from one
counting on your courage and energy.”
volume of its waters is greater than that of all the world’s rivers
“Agreed. And now, Ned, will you tell me what you mean by a promising
meters deeper, and then taking an open passageway beneath the Ice
the crowns of their trees, some small beans that I recognized as the
CHAPTER 21
Meanwhile, without scorning these theories, the Nautilus’s crew
world!
honey. Ned Land stuffed his haversack with it.
“Sir,” I said coolly, “I need to speak with you on a matter that
“Are they fighting with each other?”
“And now, professor,” the captain added, “I’ll leave you to your
conversation then turned to his everlasting escape plans, and without
“Yes, Captain Nemo,” I replied, “and the Nautilus is wonderfully
“Don’t worry, Professor Aronnax, just keep rowing!” the Canadian
“So, Mr. Naturalist,” Ned Land continued in a bantering tone, “you’ll
brought to light, deeds described here in this heavily condensed
Mark Antony’s vessel during the Battle of Actium, one of them
direction, and we’ll soon know what we’re in for.”
and turn it into steam on contact. Swift currents swept away all this
animal, be he cabin boy or sailor, mate or officer. I’ll let the
Captain Nemo rejoined us.
I fell silent. Captain Nemo stood up.
the platform. From the lounge, where I was writing up the incidents of
any worse than men elsewhere, these people you call savages?”
audient!* Not only does this passageway exist, but I’ve taken
of a whole host of coral fishermen. This valuable substance often
spotted a face that wasn’t Conseil’s but which I recognized at once.
counted seven of them. They provided the Nautilus with an escort, and
the Canadian by the shoulders.
hatch in the direction of the storage lockers, some to be eaten fresh,
Ned Land and Conseil entered.
be March 28. The Nautilus was traveling at the frightful speed of
birds.
“Sir,” the Canadian replied, “this is no time to bore you with my
heroic people. I discussed the question of Atlantis with the fervor of
After breakfast near ten o’clock, we went down onto the embankment.
have been a steamer on one of those lines out of New York to Liverpool
open, thanks to that divine justice that puts the maximum density of
Breakfast over, I made my way ashore. The Nautilus had gone a few more
vain to fall asleep. I kept searching for a relationship between the
give your medical attentions to one of my men?”
In the center of this room stood a table, richly spread. Captain Nemo
“Master is right,” Conseil said. “Walls were invented simply to
the immenseness of the Pacific, and I felt myself swept along with it,
out. But at this juncture, I have a hunch that we’re still left with
Cypraea madagascariensis, etc.
flesh, where they don’t meet enough resistance to go off. But we’ll
hull, making a slight bulge. Fore and aft stood two cupolas of
diet of nubile maidens; and woe to the foreigner who lifts a finger
head into the wind. Their undulating flight, the grace of their aerial
“No, captain, but one danger still remains.”
that numbers more than 2,000 known species. I saw long ribbons of
time. I might add that those ‘days’ in the Bible must represent whole
depths.
of the body, which was shaped like a huge diamond twenty-five feet
hands, he burned and scuttled the galleons, which went to the bottom
conditions for diving work. Now let’s put on our underwater suits, and
delightful crinoids with bell-shaped heads like little chalices on
forests. Like the flocks of old Proteus, King Neptune’s shepherd, my
ocean. Feel free to sample all of these foods. Here are some preserves
of the canted corners, that opened into the captain’s stateroom. Much
twenty feet and a length of ten meters. They didn’t move as we
stand on the captain’s affability.”
thermometer marked 3 degrees centigrade. It was as if a comparative
we forbidden to talk with each other! At least let us lead the lives
anything the least bit unearthly!
maneuvered by skillful, half-naked paddlers, and I viewed their
bottom even at 2,000 meters down.
to fear any reprisals, the natives led the chief officer,
The skiff approached cautiously to within three fathoms of the
“Sir,” the Canadian replied, “our hunting not only isn’t over, it
“But can’t we float the Nautilus clear by emptying its ballast tanks,
Réunion Island, the barometer fell to 710 millimeters. At the close of
brought to the public’s attention. But now it was no longer an issue
forget. I wrote it up in a state of intense excitement. Later I
but no aquatic game worthy of a gunshot had yet been offered to our
and affectionate to those frail single-masters drifting between a
baffled. But what could we do? This daring and powerful man couldn’t
“Sir,” I replied, “without prying into who you are, might I venture to
lower edges hanging a foot away from the wall. So the Nautilus was
a waterspout expelled with tremendous intensity.
in the sea, was about to become intimate with its coral reefs.
my stateroom. There I found dinner ready for me. It consisted of
on the surface of the waves. Instinctively I worried that I might get
saw a cabin 2 meters long in which Conseil and Ned Land, enraptured
long before we reach the entrance to the tunnel.”
saw a happy gleam in the gallant lad’s eyes, and to communicate his
filaments of the fan mussel, the body was lowered into its watery
these fish are as free as birds in the air!”
constitution they’d need in order to withstand such pressures!”
motionless, hung suspended in the midst of the waters. I observed it
stone from a sling into the midst of the vortex.
at the pole. It was now the 26th. We had lived off the ship’s stores
Even if I had discovered that some fabulous, mythological creature
the same solitude. I went to man my post near the door opening into
“Ah, it’s you, professor!” he said to me. “Well, did you have a happy
trance that was drawing him beyond the bounds of this world.
This promise was given on November 2. It had the immediate effect of
I returned to the window. The Nautilus was no longer moving. The heat
I bowed, and letting the commander attend to getting under way, I was
18th century.
When this was done, Captain Nemo and his men stood up; then they all
Arabian Tunnel
had been willing to “give in to despair,” I could not have done so!
On March 5, 1867, the Moravian from the Montreal Ocean Co., lying
“Straight ahead,” Conseil replied. “Ultimately, when he can’t go any
sulfur, or charcoal?”
This was the last shout I gave. My mouth was filling with water. I
sodium supplies, and the Nautilus could have departed immediately.
trance. Was he dreaming of those lost generations, asking them for the
surprise, I was in my stateroom. No doubt my companions had been put
“Professor,” Captain Nemo then told me, “there are pearl fisheries in
left it. We decided to return to Gueboroa Island. Ned Land hoped for
just then.
stings on their dorsal fins, and with four prickly rows of quills
Properly speaking, the Sargasso Sea covers every submerged part of
the Indian Ocean, whose evenly spaced white spots stood out sharply
morning, I climbed onto the platform. I found Captain Nemo there.
for.
“Fine, Ned. Stay on the lookout for such an opportunity, but don’t
“No,” I replied quickly, “especially if one takes certain
think he would have made an outstanding fish!
“Assuredly,” I said to myself, “he’s contracted some mental
the Nautilus navigated the waters where Crete was in rebellion against
fixed the positions I found reported on the chart, and in such a way
before the sun could be productively observed. I guided our steps
preserved in ammonia. It’s worthless.”
Indeed, the Nautilus kept the same heel to starboard. No doubt it
In fact, the Nautilus was skimming only ten meters over the soil of
sea that had swallowed one of his companions, and large tears streamed
unmatched by human choristers. I don’t say nay, but to my regret these
land animals.”
unquestioning obedience. By acting in this way, I shield you from
no less than five centimeters and weighs 394.96 metric tons. My second
But the skies became more and more threatening. There were conspicuous
depression 9,000 meters deep. From this locality to the Lesser
of the lounge. The liquid masses came into view, brightly lit by the
the Pharaoh’s army did perish at precisely that locality. So I think
couldn’t obtain them tomorrow, we would finally have to give up any
“What’s that, sir?”
shimmering about two miles from the Nautilus. What this fire was, what
barely pausing, following Captain Nemo whose gestures kept beckoning
nothing of the sort.
objects took shape before my eyes. I recognized the lower slopes of
I left Conseil to the proper stowing of our luggage and climbed on
atmospheres, which is 100 kilograms per each square centimeter. This
opposite tack. The Nautilus resumed its underwater navigating; but at
“We won’t see each other again before we go. At ten o’clock the moon
rocks that have never seen the light of day, this nether granite that
underbrush?
address a question to you, just one.”
swear to me that you’ll accept our situation without throwing a
“I accept it, Mr. Land.”
then go back to the Pacific by the notorious Northwest Passage?”
“One last question, Captain Nemo.”
slightest impact, and the animal, no matter how strong, drops dead. I
to a great human ideal: Thaddeus Kosciusko, the hero whose dying words
carbonate. Hence you observe that sodium chloride is encountered there
An Invitation in Writing
evening meal. Then the hunt was on again, and once more would be
At 10:50 in the evening, that electric light reappeared three miles to
Neptune’s flocks: an island located between Rhodes and Crete, which
Lincoln. Besides, I use my supplementary ballast tanks only to reach
On February 8, as early as the first hours of daylight, Mocha appeared
seemed determined not to forsake the field of battle.
ground was covered with slag, lava flows, and pumice stones. Its
inside the Nautilus’s plating, but a hate so monstrous or so sublime
honesty, this lounge is enough to astonish even someone Flemish like
first one to wake up. My companions weren’t yet stirring and still lay
method without delay.
fish with red fins and a brown body covered with nodules. The
fallen more than once. When I turned around, I could still see the
in Reao Island over its whole flat, wooded expanse. Obviously its
always pictures as wreathed in lightning.
at close range. Fortunately Ned’s hands came across a big mooring ring
“But this sea, Professor Aronnax,” he told me, “this prodigious,
he was answerable.
Where was Captain Nemo? Had he perished? Had his companions died with
“We were wrong, Conseil.”
this deplorable state.”
By the next day, March 27, six meters of ice had been torn from the
path. No doubt he had often traveled it and was incapable of losing
11th. Its navigating was marked by an encounter with an immense school
waters. Harpoon in hand, Ned Land went to take his stand in the
called “tuff,” reddish in color as if made from crushed bricks. The
create a vacuum, enabling them to stick to objects like suction cups.
we can’t accept even the views of the ancients, who regarded it as
nights, alternately streak air and water with their phosphorescent
dreadful animals, no longer minded them. We arrived at a preliminary
leaned at angles that, on dry land, the laws of gravity would never
during our session the previous afternoon, and I hoped to see him
wonderful than the skin covering them: white underneath, gray above,
we had to tread cautiously in the midst of pudding stones that weren’t
17. From Cape Horn to the Amazon
picking up a piece of chalky stone, he advanced to a black basaltic
soon set free. This operation was swiftly executed because the fresh
bracelets; the pear-shaped ones into earrings, and since they’re the
joined.
Before I could make a single movement to prevent him, the Canadian
leagues east to west, this island group lies between latitude 2
blazing core whose unbearable glow diminished by degrees outward.
“Oh good!” I replied. “The reckless Mr. Land is at it again!”
“Cleopatra,” Conseil shot back.
jetties of Port Said when we’re in the Mediterranean.”
quite a large sum.”
of -6 degrees to -7 degrees centigrade, when I noted that little by
armistice signed between Prussia and Austria after the Battle of
Conseil entered. I described our nocturnal excursion to him, and since
by J. Hetzel et Cie. over the period 1869-71.
island, which I can see to this day with its remarkable fringe of
they belong today.
Ned Land and Conseil returned to their cabin. As for me, I repaired to
directly:
“Sure I do,” the harpooner replied in all seriousness. “They’re
“Then come along, professor, and we’ll go put on our diving suits.”
nuts still bolting us to the underwater boat.
forehead high and broad, nose large but not flat, teeth white. Their
existence aboard the Nautilus, every pleasant or unpleasant incident
Just then Captain Nemo stopped. He waited until I joined him, then he
their fearsome eyes. Losing all self-control, Ned Land hurled threats
wants.”
“Look! Look!” the Canadian exclaimed, his voice full of
It was indeed that bygone abode of Proteus, the old shepherd of King
whaleboat at your disposal?”
“The Ice Bank!” the Canadian told me.
fast bonito, as they are clumsy and heavy on land. They uttered
clear: the strait that Luis Vaez de Torres faced on returning from the
was decomposed by our powerful batteries, this life-giving elastic
“Then how do you break free?” I asked.
amassed this gold, and what was he about to do with it?
“Entirely accidental, sir. I was navigating two meters beneath the
cloaks flapping at middepth, toothless guitarfish that were a type of
India’s eastern shore; a marbled turban snail gleaming with
Africa and
henpecked husbands.
to set us free, will meekly stand by while we spread those secrets all
Among bony fish, Conseil noticed some blackish marlin three meters
welling up in the depths of his gullet, and I saw his movements turn
motionless plants would shoot right back to their original
air in this whole underwater boat as well.
There I dressed in sturdy seafaring clothes. I gathered my notes and
was, but no wiser.
On March 15 we passed beyond the latitude of the South Shetland and
St. John’s in Newfoundland and Heart’s Content, where the Atlantic
exterminated, it ran at another, tacked on the spot so as not to miss
intensity. Inner boilings sent quick shivers running through the
“Damnation!” the Canadian exclaimed. “I know full well what happened!
all. We’re leaving on the Abraham Lincoln.”
along the coral bushes, going steadily higher.
“I can see, captain, that nature is your obedient servant, any time or
“Even though he has already made that clear?”
hadn’t even suspected. I closed the book and resumed my strolling. Ned
greatest commanders! Like so many others, he began with difficulties
silken filaments with which the fan mussel, a type of seashell quite
eyes, the Canadian focused the full power of his gaze on the ship for
trunks ripped from the Rocky Mountains or the Andes and sent floating
arrived amidships. There I found a sort of shaft heading upward
sperm whale, whose length sometimes exceeds twenty-five meters. The
finest exhibits. Coral sells for as much as 500 francs per kilogram,
indiscriminately slaughter pregnant females and youngsters, and over
decomposed particles of fish and marine plants to form vegetable
gloomier. I had a sense of what he was suffering because I also was
I ignored this innuendo and waited for Captain Nemo’s explanation.
from the hunter’s standpoint. Several times I saw Captain Nemo stop
them. Farther on lay a part of the globe he would no longer tread
in the scholarly societies and scientific journals. The “monster
three-quarters of the day on the platform. I stared at the
denials from the various governments. Since the public interest was at
“pleasure trip” getting under way. Oars in position, five of the
up its drive power, setting the propeller in swifter rotation.
genuinely steep paths that allowed us to climb little by little; but
Then the panels in the lounge closed. We kept our hands over our eyes,
Conseil. By that time Captain Nemo will be locked in his room and
“In how many centuries?” Conseil asked.
spotted a monstrous squid swimming in their waters. Commander Bouguer
with premature wrinkles that misfortune, perhaps misery, had etched
me. After supper was served me by the mute and emotionless steward, I
to seven atmospheres. Under this pressure the Abraham Lincoln reached
noise cetaceans make when they spurt water from their blowholes?”
Thrown into the sea, the suckerfish immediately began to play their
about!
I started moving, groping my way. After five steps I encountered an
harmony of his facial expressions and bodily movements resulted in an
the platform. Ned and Conseil were there, enraptured with the
soft one. The devilfish doesn’t belong to the vertebrate branch, and
it. At certain moments the ship encountered ice at a depth of 900
the Basques in its wake, then Asturian Spaniards, Englishmen, and
if I provide some ballast tanks equal in capacity to that one-tenth,
they went by guesswork in the midst of currents they barely
the ocean floor, and in a few seconds we had a perfect negative.
“Where are we?” I said.
*Latin: “They have ears but hear not.” Ed.
a thing from cotton growers, sheep, or silkworms on shore.
Finally this mass of sperm whales thinned out. The waves grew tranquil
ruins you could still detect the solid proportions of a sort of Tuscan
lost consciousness.
For about an hour the Nautilus cruised in the midst of this school of
“Only, sir,” I added, “I’ll take the liberty of addressing a question
I was snapped out of my mental struggles by these words from Ned Land:
. . . but no, you silly fool! Captain Nemo already knew the pros and
The next day, April 1, when the Nautilus rose to the surface of the
Around the Nautilus for a half-mile radius, the waters seemed
It then dawned on me to ask Captain Nemo if he had already discovered
before I leave him forever, I want to finish this underwater tour of
those daunting strokes of the tail hitting our sides, the ship never
cable lengths of the Nautilus. I could easily distinguish them. They
chiefly of plants, shells, and other exhibits from the ocean that must
“That’s no whale,” continued Ned Land, whose eyes never strayed from
Now, it was a school of argonauts then voyaging on the surface of the
days. Now then, we’ve been buried beneath the waters for thirty-six
Canadian hovered in readiness to strike; but then the dugong would
CHAPTER 14
generated them. After I parted them with my hands, these otherwise
whole whaling fleet.”
without stopping there; and overall, this voyage was plagued by
“Which is still too many for three men!” Conseil muttered.
stick to the oyster’s shell are more erratically shaped and are priced
Nautilus’s seamen surrounded their captain and stared with a feeling
islands emerged, disappeared beneath temporary floods, rose again,
The savages approached without running, but they favored us with a
ports. Now then, late in 1702 Spain was expecting a rich convoy, which
will become lifeless and unlivable.”
Near three o’clock in the afternoon on July 6, fifteen miles south of
“Agreed, but I repeat, Conseil: such a phenomenon won’t occur. The
between the Gulf of Suez and the Gulf of Aqaba.
without difficulty. Accordingly, not wanting to entangle his propeller
whale is an awkward animal, more tadpole than fish, as Professor
inside this underwater boat.
Gibraltar.
rang out on that bed of ice. Arms grew weary, hands were rubbed raw,
water. Captain Nemo gave us a hand signal. We followed him down a
The next day I related the night’s events to Conseil and the Canadian,
prodigious speed. By July 3 we were at the entrance to the Strait of
which, as you know, stands at one end of the platform.
However, during the day of March 16, these tracts of ice completely
words in 1869, and little has changed since. 126 years later, a Time
I didn’t reply to the Canadian’s proposition but kept watching the
were touching ruins many thousands of years old, contemporary with
afloat on the surface of the sea and drawing nearer to the Arab
madreporic rocks had been made fertile by tornadoes and
these is amply represented by the four zoophyte groups, three classes
consists of two families. Examples: puffers and moonfish.”
noticeably takes the shape of a cigar, a shape already adopted in
your personal identities for me. I now know that sheer chance has
stretched a distance twice the length of its body and were writhing
I couldn’t find the crater that had vomited them up. There as yonder,
fellow countrymen but refined by me for my own special uses, thereby
this cabin the captain could simultaneously signal heading and speed
unconsciously echoing a famous catchphrase of the scientist Arago.
During this part of our voyage, we navigated on the surface of the
“We’ll soon see,” Ned Land replied, shaking his head with a determined
operation. Did he simply limit himself to storing the air in
what he inevitably must be: cruel and merciless. I viewed him as
period, the tops of mountains gradually appeared above the waves,
So the skiff didn’t leave shipside that day, much to the displeasure
studied us with great care. Was he reluctant to speak further? Did he
in this ocean.
Sheer chance had placed me in the presence of the most valuable
given to the water, all the light substances will be found crowding
At eight o’clock the mist rolled ponderously over the waves, and its
“Well, with all due respect to master,” Conseil replied serenely, “if
converging, and in this narrow space collisions were
the United States of America.”
every ship defeated by the ocean still lay, some already old and
with granite rubble, proving that this island was of primordial
“I think we’re trapped, captain.”
phenomenon. It announces the presence of a pack, or shoal, of ice.
“I mean we can’t go forward, backward, or sideways. I think that’s the
zones in the sky. We reached a depth of 16,000 meters—four vertical
don’t think that the presence of these salts is due merely to some
driving at, I waited for further questions, ready to reply as
with the poet and legislator Solon as their inspiration, as it were.
And as for other fish common to the Atlantic and Mediterranean, I was
after him. Yet he didn’t attack. Was he, perhaps, still undecided?
kept their wide-ranging power. Nevertheless, when I scaled a high
their boat.”
vast plains we were now crossing? I wanted to ask the captain, but I
A complete, unabridged translation of Vingt mille lieues sous les mers
to stern, toppling crewmen, breaking spare masts and yardarms from
years before.
life into me drop by drop! I tried to push the device away. They held
that it had no dire consequences.”
only at night in the midst of the most secretive darkness, while the
entrusted with restoring the balance between hot and cold temperatures
on the globe has escaped my investigations.”
This fruit contained no pits. Conseil brought a dozen of them to Ned
Abraham Lincoln slowed down and stayed at half steam. For its part,
Bunsen battery that I activate not with potassium dichromate but with
themselves to save me. A few atoms of air were still left in the
“Master will reply, my friends, that baleen whales are localized,
sighted. He summoned his engineer.
Dreadful to hear, Captain Nemo was even more dreadful to see. His face
such brightness, they overpowered our electric light.
James Hobbs, chief officer on the Union out of Calcutta, had put to
medium depth, which left blacks and browns in charge of designing
see a soul from the crew. Ned and Conseil spent the better part of the
certain rolling and pitching movements, I sensed that the Nautilus had
is January 4, and in five days the moon will be full. Now then, I’ll
At his signal the anchor was lowered, but its chain barely ran because
had to be the case. One part of Captain Nemo’s secret life had been
swirl past like musical cascades; in the realm of geology, he studies
“That suits me, captain.”
lofty boughs, lost up in the shadows of the waves, while at our feet
Nautilus. Hollowed from tree trunks, these dugouts were long, narrow,
doubt mistaken, because I don’t see a thing.”
be poking fun at us!”
and anger.
“Yes, my boy. There are some shellfish that turn into real jewel
rose to the surface of the waves only at night, and relying solely on
what concern or perhaps what distress it might cause him, and what he
After passing the well of the companionway that led to the platform, I
expression indicated that he understood my story. When I finished, he
11. The Sargasso Sea
uneasy slumber.
its maximum width, 150 miles; its circumference, 900 miles; its
the narwhale’s electric glow disappeared. At seven o’clock the day was
Standing by the port deadlight, I spotted magnificent coral
Biscay. There its waters, still weak in temperature and color, begin
“Because when the orb of day sweeps in such long spirals, it’s
Arms crossed, leaning against a corner of the table, the commander
explained only one side of Captain Nemo.
instruments are open to committing serious errors.”
plants kept closer to the surface of the sea, while reds occupied a
dinner. He came wonderfully to terms with its entire cooking. Grilling
Frédol has noted. It’s poorly constructed, being “defective,” so to
his men climbed onto the whale’s flank, and to my astonishment, I saw
morning we sanitize the ship by ventilating it in the open air.”
level of the ocean for long intervals.
New York
vegetation, enormous petrified trees linked by garlands of elegant
had to sidestep its thrusts.
In essence, it was a cluster of countless open-sea infusoria, of
“Well, Ned, the fates were against us yesterday.”
amazement will probably be your habitual state of mind. It will be a
By nine o’clock we had pulled up to shore. The sky was growing
In its interior I heard the sound of footsteps and muffled voices. But
“Yes, sometimes,” the captain replied. “These animals have been known
brittle and stony in nature. These polyps have a unique generating
Meanwhile the ballast tanks filled with water and the Nautilus sank
going to encounter a pressure, and consequently undergo an upward
now we had actually started our return journey. Did it still have
From the eighty-ninth fish genus in Lacépède’s system of
soon was deep enough to receive the body.
through, as a gimlet pierces a wine barrel. The museum at the Faculty
Nautilus in the midst of the Antarctic seas.
near isolation, we raised the Tuamotu Islands on December 11, that old
electricity, they seemed ready to salute us with their colors and send
Ned Land went westward up the coast; then, fording some stream beds,
to regain our balance?”
Also discredited was the idea of a floating hull or some other
dyed with purple ink from the murex snail and shaded with violet tints
brisk. The thermometer marked -2 degrees centigrade. The mist had
breath. Seemingly, the moment this enormous narwhale came up to
of an encounter, and observing the vast expanse of the
phenomenon made by the hand of man.
Before I had time to express the surprise this new proposition caused
reexamination of our cell.
“What about these savages?” Conseil asked me. “With all due respect to
leaned his elbows on the beacon housing, his eyes straying over the
harpoon?”
stared at them through our thick glass windows: they swam backward
surely connects Africa with America, and visited its great prehistoric
millions. They were migrating from the temperate zones toward zones
under your belt and let’s be off.”
back beneath the mildly phosphorescent waters.
have been Captain Nemo’s own personal finds. In the middle of the
of the Red Sea, hurled toward the Mediterranean by the tunnel’s
mystery of Nemo’s past life and future intentions, the mounting
telegram, and that’s that.”
skiff.”
without veering from the 52nd meridian. From 67 degrees 30’ to 90
endless. My hands parted liquid curtains that closed again behind me,
density at -2 degrees centigrade, then cool off, grow lighter, and
Conseil didn’t finish his sentence, but I could easily see what he was
luminescent matter so intense that at first I couldn’t stand the
one-meter lumpfish, blackish on top with orange on the belly and rare
“Your freedom!” Captain Nemo put in, standing up.
improved by a stay in salt water.
if I’m not mistaken, the consumption of sodium needed by your electric
gathered by the fowl forgers and skillfully fitted onto some poor
This was plain speaking. A flash of anger and scorn lit up the
from the wrecked vessels. On May 15, 1824, his ship, the St. Patrick,
I’ve already granted one to Mr. Land, and on the same grounds!
In a few moments we had put on our equipment. Air tanks, abundantly
think I toil to gather this treasure out of selfishness? Who says I
platform and soon took their places in the ship’s pantry. As for fish,
“Well, how about you, Conseil? What are your feelings about these
CHAPTER 8
“Well, Conseil my friend, identify them! Start naming them!” Ned Land
“There you go again, Conseil my friend!” the impatient Canadian shot
of cutting a canal between the two, and instead they picked the Nile
like the serpentine hair of the Furies. You could plainly see its 250
Mediterranean, abalone whose shell produces a mother-of-pearl much in
they died out altogether. Why was the Nautilus stopping? Whether this
trickle out. There were heliotropes, very remiss at living up to their
equipment, and we’ll suit up just before we begin our underwater
These animals were small in stature. They were a species of those
at such depths?”
flesh and big conical humps.
stand out against the ocean and operate on a different level from the
they were accustomed to living in the harshest climates and stayed on
Nautilus, driven downward by its propeller and slanting fins,
town.
whose landmarks change continuously.
bachelor. Neither wife, parents, nor children are waiting for him back
on the other hand, didn’t have to practice such moderation: we could
crewmen were bustling around, black shadows that stood out clearly in
“And wasn’t its mouth a real parrot’s beak but of fearsome size?”
tuna swim in triangle formation, which prompted the ancients to say
Near seven o’clock Ned and Conseil joined me. Those two inseparable
Ned Land on the other. That said, your friend Conseil is listening,
The class Spongiaria contains about 300 species that are encountered
but they’re accurate and appropriate. Among the Brachyura, Conseil
common man may still believe in fabulous comets crossing outer space,
said without further preamble:
mightily. I couldn’t curb its pulsations. My anxiety and agitation
“Well, have I convinced you?”
names of blood flower and blood foam that the industry confers on its
through north, west, and south, moving in the opposite direction of
By then the frigate lay in latitude 31 degrees 15’ north and longitude
repeatedly encountered a gruesome sight: human corpses floating on the
shellfish per dive, because he had to tear them from the banks where
if they did approach us, at least they kept at a distance regrettable
“O almighty God! Enough! Enough!”
The Nautilus kept to its southeasterly heading. On December 1 it cut
there by gigantic pines. It was like a still-erect coalfield, its
transparent air but continuously under construction by fires in the
marine insurance bureau, the figure for steam or sailing ships
“Never, sir,” the captain said, swiftly interrupting me.
be penetrated by the sea; the library, 5 meters long; the main lounge,
sharks went by, eight feet long and gifted with an extremely acute
animal caught up with us, played with us. It made a full circle around
London for several projects of the same kind. The length of this
baleen whales equal 100 elephants in bulk. Imagine the impact of such
a mere reef, for us an immense cavern. I discovered it by chance, and
would tell.
“That’s all?”
government of the Union will be pleased to regard you as France’s
feet of their gigantic trunks, there grew orchids, leguminous plants,
was less than probable. Where and when had he built it, and how could
rights. So they lodged a complaint in Madrid, and they obtained an
renew the Nautilus’s air.”
skins covered white, slightly fibrous pulps. But a great many others
coral, sea anemone trailing the long tresses of their tentacles, some
At this point in my story, I need to get a grip on myself, reconstruct
tongues; croakers with gold caudal fins; black surgeonfish; four-eyed
Nautilus.
“Get rid of those ideas, Mr. Land,” I answered the harpooner. “And
“No fishermen. Scientists maybe!”
openings of their nasal passages. When they were captured, some
his way. No doubt I will do likewise. And yet I will feel some regret
so dense in comparison to the atmosphere, a gunshot couldn’t carry far
“Professor,” Captain Nemo replied, “my electricity isn’t the
“Good news,” Ned put in.
and his great enemy—information revealed only in a later novel, The
ignoring those exaggerated views that saw it as a mile wide and three
opening through which I had detected that faint glimmer, obviously
these underwater wonders? Speaking for myself, I’ll be extremely
to great heights.
directly overhead, I thought I caught sight of a feeble glimmer, a
them where we were.
not himself in attaining his ends, I could understand such a life. But
seafloor rose to within two meters of the surface of the water. I
great strength, he tumbled to the deck.
kept accidentally confusing the two kingdoms, mistaking zoophytes for
felt. Meanwhile the Nautilus accelerated its backward movement, and
“Sodium?”
Passing near these unusual animals, I could examine them at my leisure
Because, as that Time cover story suggests, we still haven’t caught up
tracks and go out the southern opening. That’s all.”
inside door opened, and we passed into the wardrobe.
them draw from its udders all the milk they held, in other words,
“Until now, however, I’ve seen only clear waves, without any unique
our imprisonment to an end, or a year that will see this strange
had to be worth a good high price. Its coat, chestnut brown above and
Just then, as mute and emotionless as ever, seven crewmen climbed onto
WE COME TO the conclusion of this voyage under the seas. What happened
going to relive its daily existence! What a fascinating field of study
and if you removed all its dissolved saline content, you’d create a
completely open mind. Those reports from the Shannon and the Helvetia
rays were licking at the sea’s horizon:
giving you all my objections in advance.”
that flourished below his chin.
“When I encounter him.”
our situation had such generous rewards in store for us, we had no
steps that rang on the seafloor with astonishing intensity. The
his sole responsibility. I soon heard the poor lad gasping; his
But modern science has not endorsed these designations, and this
never see this fantastic animal again. I was mistaken.
by means of a small grappling iron, and at the surface it was secured
in this cramped prison, exposed to those horrible temptations to which
I thought the commander would offer me his hand, to seal our
its mother’s neck! The postures of the four seamen seemed ghastly to
much in demand in the Russian and Chinese markets; the fineness and
animals. One of these boats made a dreadful first impression: sides
in this weed-choked mass, Captain Nemo stayed at a depth some meters
calls were deafening. Mistaking the Nautilus for the corpse of a
I would have been deeply interested in visiting this long, 360-league
volcanic. Traces of lava, slag, and basaltic rock were everywhere, but
passed, our hunger nagged unmercifully, and this time the steward did
latitude 30 degrees 7’ north, in other words, about 300 miles from the
The next day, January 30, when the Nautilus rose to the surface of the
The latter went out. Soon the panels closed. The ceiling lit up.
“Good,” Ned put in. “Where’s that ship from?”
testes of moray to make that divine platter that so enraptured the
could see the Nautilus’s beacon twinkling like a star. The captain
this pearl to others I already knew about, and to those shimmering in
of vitality.
“underwater boat” of tremendous motor power.
I took a last look at the wounded man, then I replied:
personal claim to the South Pole. And in this last action he falls
board. His coal bunkers were overflowing. Not a crewman was missing
coast of Australia. Our boat cruised along a few miles away from that
Striking an average of observations taken at different times—rejecting
hour of five.
the horizon was ideal for taking sights.
my submersible. And . . . hold on . . . just now we’re proceeding at
However, near midnight it disappeared, or to use a more appropriate
“I’ll confer with him, Ned.”
chance to make.”
Near two o’clock I was busy organizing my notes in the lounge, when
bass, jewelfish, flying fish. Certain of this fact, I wondered if
Finally, after two hours of walking, we reached a depth of about 300
serve him.”
ichthyology of this sea.
every pore. He didn’t move. My spyglass fell from his hand and rolled
I meticulously noted these different depths, obtaining the underwater
“No, my boy, but I’d gladly have sacrificed a finger for such a find!”
some enormous derelict ship? They were unable to say. But when they
And he pressed an electric button, transmitting an order to the crew’s
depth would be about seven kilometers.”
sea at latitude 70 degrees 14’. In 1825 the Englishman Powell was
Newcastle. Here, dressed in diving suits, pick and mattock in hand, my
ships, laden for the East Indies, were heading toward the Cape of Good
sank to his knees, and melted into sobs.
“When will we reach Vanikoro?”
trouble, it also did 19.3.
“Are you grasping all this, Ned my friend?” asked the scholarly
horizon. This ability—as I later verified—was strengthened by a range
paradise lose the magnificent feathers around their tails that
others have failed, I’ll succeed. Never before has my Nautilus cruised
occasionally broken by the calls of pelicans and nocturnal birds, by
languages. It contains a summary of my research under the sea, and God
How many new specimens of underwater flora and fauna I marveled at
them without discomfort. But in the water it’s another story.”
“No, but I can back away from the fireplace producing it.”
because we were lying too low in the water. I imagine that steamboat
“Well, captain,” I said, “on behalf of the baleen whales, there’s
stripes giving off a golden gleam. They are said to follow ships in
THE PANELS CLOSED over this frightful view, but the lights didn’t go
“No, it wouldn’t be advisable,” replied Nemo the Emotionless.
mother-of-pearl in certain bivalves.”
undulated placidly beneath the frigate’s stempost.
these brightly colored boughs. I fancied I saw these cylindrical,
didn’t seem too unbearable.
struggling with convulsive movements, trying to turn over, making such
“What do you mean?”
fighter for freedom, yet all who board his ship are imprisoned there
only point out that after raising so many objections against my plan,
struggled against being dragged into the depths. . . .
attempt. I sensed that we were no longer navigating under normal
their riveted joins; metal bars arched; bulkheads groaned; the lounge
After I arrived in New York, several people did me the honor of
of the Atlantic.
prevent. Since our weapons made no sound when they went off, they
at seeing four huge, copper craniums leaning over him!
But just then the renowned French explorer Captain Dumont d’Urville,
Ocean. Where would Captain Nemo’s fancies take us? Would he head up to
fact, the same views can also be found in Arrian, Agatharchides, and
gleaming with the most cheerful colors; bluish gray dragonets with
administration went down in history, will succeed only through the
I watched the monster’s horrible legs writhing in dreadful
“Well then, captain, let’s free ourselves within forty-eight hours!”
I also noted long, whitish strings of salps, a type of mollusk found
where land lay, but I saw only a blurred line covering three-quarters
“I doubt it, Mr. Land. Nevertheless, I’m counting on your dexterity to
Soon, scarcely blurred by their distance from us, the forms of some
the Nautilus.
work, supplying drinking water via evaporation. The mechanism was
tight-lipped mood and his bad temper were growing by the day. Under
long pectoral fins, gliding over the surface of the water with
I wasn’t sure what to think, when a voice said to me:
make your acquaintance and then think things over. Your four versions
had no desire to leave Captain Nemo. Thanks to him and his
“What! We must give up seeing our homeland, friends, and relatives
more important than the lives of three men, I believe that our very
“Right,” I said. “Nevertheless, it isn’t mathematically exact proof,
sponges and forests of coral? Have you glimpsed the towns built on its
Before digging into the ice, the captain had to obtain borings, to
In this locality there gaped the mouth of a magnificent cave. My
Just then Captain Nemo turned to me:
much as the man’s sickness.
think we’ll do better if we return to the forest regions.”
“Yes, professor.”
What can that animal be? It doesn’t have a forked tail like baleen
efforts of one man. So all hail to Mr. de Lesseps!”
to me:
No more shore in sight. Nothing but the immenseness of the sea. A few
“Open sea!” he told me.
profound impression on my mind. And so Captain Nemo would live out his
“But to get near it,” the commander went on, “I’d have to put a
willing to believe it, but two months have already gone by since then,
“It will finish, Ned.”
genuine porcupines of the sea, armed with stings and able to inflate
We left the lounge. Nobody in the library. Nobody by the central
latter in every direction and sported a wonderful indigo tint. The
imperative to make contact with whatever beings were confined inside
And as I stared at this desolate wreckage, Captain Nemo told me in a
“Unfortunately,” he went on, “I can’t take you through that Suez
CHAPTER 7
“Don’t give up so easily, Conseil,” the Canadian replied.
necessary drain on the Nautilus’s reserves. As for the Ruhmkorff
bumped the Nautilus’s side, then all sounds ceased.
bore, a weapon that would figure in the Universal Exhibition of
you thought I was contradicting myself. When I informed you that it
which furnished our table with a dainty but wholesome dish.
Indeed, my hands were holding my own work on the great ocean depths. I
disturbed by it, had it not been for the shouts of crewmen in the
Nebraska badlands in the United States. In my capacity as Assistant
lies in watching the play of its organism. It owns a pulse and
civilized man! I’ve severed all ties with society, for reasons that I
all around us! Who would have known that a dreadful hurricane was then
tracts of ice.
activities, the French government sent a sloop of war to Vanikoro, the
pleasure.
On the rear paneling, beneath the portraits of his heroes, I saw the
where they’re cut open and spread out on display. But in the water
was cruising under the waters. Sliding under our hull, this block then
escape the Provençal fishermen, who prize them as highly as did the
18. Four Thousand Leagues Under the Pacific
and a bronze bell bearing the inscription “Made by Bazin,” the foundry
Ice Bank.”
industry.”
“But we will go to the pole, Mr. Land.”
“But I didn’t say we’d return to Europe.”
As for the crew, they only wanted to encounter the unicorn, harpoon
fifteen meters per second. Their volume and power increased with the
reassured about our fate, and it seemed obvious that our hosts didn’t
marketplace, as well as excellent dishes for the tables of rich
had slightly exaggerated its dimensions, and I put its length at only
incisors, and as for their upper canines, they consist of two tusks
marvelous power of his vision could have performed yeoman service. But
another.”
memory, they were quite startled to be back in their cabin.
took action himself, would certainly have ruined everything.
“What’s the Nautilus’s heading?” I asked.
embedded in the creature’s folds. On the valves a pearl sticks fast;
horde of bipeds whose proximity worries me.”
kick of the heel, rose to the surface of the sea.
were more whimsical but less colorful than the former, which kept
we reentered the northern hemisphere.
imminent new danger, what would happen to our chances for salvation,
dwelling inside whatever abandoned seashells they could take over,
lanterns under these waves. Their brightness might unexpectedly
“No, Ned,” I replied, “it isn’t worth more. Nobody could be better
entered the library, and I passed into an immense, splendidly lit
hostility. Between Europeans and savages, it’s acceptable for
every instance Captain Nemo displayed an ingenuity equaled only by his
as fifteen is to twenty. Please forgive me for this underhanded way of
creatures like the southern right whale or the bowhead whale, they
around it. People were constantly babbling about the creature, even
a glass spiral that contains only a residue of carbon dioxide
manners.
breathing the clean oxygen drawn from the air tanks and supplied by
I couldn’t tell.
Perhaps! In any event the Nautilus was going to try. In fact, I could
“But in that case—” I put in.
“But what’s wrong, my boy?”
mystifying individual didn’t appear one single time during our
architecture; farther off, the remains of a gigantic aqueduct; here,
kilograms each. I told Ned Land and Conseil that farseeing nature had
small, can figure in your menu, that I don’t understand at all.”
“When we return to shore, jaded from all these natural wonders,”
. . . ! All these events passed before my eyes like backdrops
longboat. My crew close up the hole belonging to the Nautilus; I close
genus to which it belonged, and the species in which it would find its
with moral strength. He could still think, plan, and act.
accuracy. The Nautilus easily avoided the Money breakers to port and
The full truth dawned on me. Undoubtedly people now knew where they
on their diving suits. I informed the captain of Ned’s proposition,
plans. The weather was thoroughly foul. We were approaching waterways
announcement only as a lead-in to my topic.
snatched from my hands.
It seemed wiser to accept the harpooner’s proposition than to debate
adorned with three protruding ridges that ran lengthwise. I was sorry
methods you’re using strike me as primitive. Who knows where the winds
I spun around. Captain Nemo was standing before me, but I almost
“Yes, sir. We’re shut up in a relatively confined area. If the
high-speed crossing. I estimate that the Nautilus covered a track of
little. I left the table at seven o’clock. 120 minutes—I was keeping
a handsome fish decorated by every honorary order, bedizened with
“Are you clear on the chain of events?” Captain Nemo asked me.
pinned to the wall, I had to explain myself straight out. And in this
luminous ripples breaking over my hands, shimmering sheets spattered
With that, Conseil clapped his hands over his eyes.
In the zoophyte branch, class Alcyonaria, one finds the order
be of no help to them!”
where this wonderful fruit of nature was “ripening”; he alone reared
to pallid white when dead.
to be called meteorites.”
“At close quarters?” I repeated.
withstand a collision with his underwater Monitor? What armor plate,
but damnation, he isn’t more powerful than nature. If she draws a
on the ocean floor.
circumstances.
“All right then, my fine harpooner, if vertebrates several hundred
replenished by rains, fed by no important rivers, continually drained
sunrise. A strenuous task, but feasible, thanks to our relieving each
touched the rim of the horizon. While he was taking his sights, he
hypothesis of a drifting islet or an elusive reef, put forward by
extinct mountain.
incomparable man who faced it head-on.
but we mustn’t overdo ’em, and a slice of fresh venison grilled over
silver-plated dinnerware gleamed under rays pouring from light
his fishing trips and his battles with great natural lyricism. His
attempt could be carried out just as effectively as here.”
breakfast we’ll make our way ashore and choose an observation post.”
And they opened amazingly wide. Eyes and spyglasses (a bit dazzled, it
crew’s quarters from the engine room. A door opened, and I stood in
two india-rubber hoses leave this box and feed to a kind of tent that
history, poetry, fiction, and science, from Homer to Victor Hugo, from
stop. I hovered in that painful state that predominates during the
continuously. When it rose briefly to the surface to renew our air,
“That Indian, professor, lives in the land of the oppressed, and I am
is audible from far away when it sends up towering spouts of air and
for excursions and fishing trips.”
at treading land, the captain scaled the steepest slopes with a supple
“Professor Aronnax,” Captain Nemo answered me, “I’ve said you’d be
Nemo and one of his companions—a herculean type who must have been
“and how about that Mediterranean?”
frankly, it tasted like leather.
distinction between the man and the scientist. It was no ordinary
fine animal may even let itself be captured in European seas—as a
For the past ten years, Conseil had gone with me wherever science
picturesque piles of volcanic blocks and enormous pumice stones. All
spots. So please do me the favor of waiting a bit before you form your
believer in slavery; and finally, that martyr for the redemption of
formulation. But let’s continue our observations.”
degrees 4’; and late in 1842 he returned to 71 degrees but couldn’t
When I had absorbed a chestful of this clean air, I looked for the
the waters, brown lantern sharks, prism-shaped humantin sharks armored
“Spain had to withstand these allies. But the country had practically
Delphinia numbers ten genera, and the dolphins I saw were akin to the
The Black Current
Captain Nemo had brought a spyglass with a reticular eyepiece, which
unleashed on the surface of this ocean?
After renewing its air, the Nautilus stayed at an average depth of
In the broad electric daylight, an enormous black mass, quite
I observed that these Mediterranean depths became more and more
sixteen-decimeter mackerel with short, sharp teeth, covered with small
under the bowsprit.
acceptable excuse for ignoring this Summons to Appear!
history.
withdraw itself by a backward motion truly inexplicable.
outlandish calls and participated in numerous public assemblies that
enlightenment having nothing to do with science.
sack with shellfish gathered at random. Then he went back up, emptied
If the Nautilus was submerged during these losses of balance, we heard
two other vessels of still greater power and tonnage. In 1853 the
stateroom. I asked them the purpose of their visit.
To my deep astonishment, Captain Nemo gave him a signal. The diver
Captain Nemo chopped off this fearsome tentacle, which slid writhing
day!”
Captain Nemo finished his sentence with a vehement gesture. Then,
“Then we aren’t returning to Paris?” Conseil asked.
SECOND PART
being expelled by a contracting movement. This jellylike substance
a visit to the forests of Oceania.
a mild dunking. Let’s go change clothes on the Nautilus.”
frigate? Was it unintentionally that your shells bounced off my ship’s
“I can easily believe it, Ned, just as I can believe that certain
species, the cumana. Living in a conducting medium such as water, this
are three more below. Now then, since these ice mountains don’t exceed
passing into the mouth of the English Channel, that our heading would
back to sea on July 13, 1866.
“Sir, just what is a pearl exactly?”
took on a guide and interpreter in the person of a deserter who had
d’Urville’s two sloops of war had gone aground, when he changed
“Trapped! What do you mean?”
“Ah, Conseil my friend, you saved the best for last, in my opinion
shoulders.
occurred to me that these words either referred to the state of the
Near two o’clock in the morning, I went to snatch a few hours of
Along the narrow walls of this passageway, I saw only brilliant
the bay, with no masts or funnels—what were they to make of it?
do not.
enough to find our way, and it still wasn’t necessary to activate the
cruising under the ocean, sometimes on its surface. The Nautilus
I specifically observed some bony fish belonging to the goby genus,
At the far end stood a fourth watertight bulkhead, separating the
“Note well, my fine Canadian,” I went on, “if such an animal exists,
onto the platform. Several seamen were with him. Captain Nemo didn’t
reply, and left us.
over the globe, would form a layer more than ten meters high. And
told Conseil, “that inhabitants of the Faroe Islands simply fit the
“How long,” I asked, “will the oxygen in the air tanks enable us to
“Right,” the commander replied. “And if it has their power to
“It goes to the skiff,” he replied.
trees land animals loaded with cutlets and roast beef, which I’d be
America, and Germany were deeply concerned.
let its pilothouse emerge, or it slipped away to the lower depths,
his prow pointing south. Where was he taking us? I was afraid to
“But which volcanic mountain is this?” I asked.
For several hours the Nautilus drifted in this brilliant tide, and our
thousand other iron objects rusting away.
Frantic, I rushed into the library. I climbed the central
able to brave their fury with impunity.
governments could not be doubted. Besides, how could the assembly of
“Didn’t it measure about six meters?” said Conseil, who was stationed
gray stripes and armed with stings, then some Antarctic rabbitfish
“And how about the subdivisions of these two large classes?”
endeavor . . . ?”
like so many hieroglyphics, made it a rare trinket. I placed it in
“I might add,” I went on, “that there’s a similar barrier between
us no lunch at all?”
My two companions lay down on the cabin’s carpeting and were soon deep
were endless. Ned identified the fish, Conseil classified them, and as
to it on the 6th of the same month. Seven days later, on February 13,
time to calm our troubled vision.
“Unintentionally,” I said.
coat of fan-mussel fabric lined with sealskin. I was ready. I was
“It was a slaughter of destructive animals,” the captain replied, “and
from every shore and resting on the waves from their exhausting
already brought back in part.
works on natural history, and I realized that they made up the
“Can one find several pearls in the same oyster?” Conseil asked.
where its running lights were fading out in the distance. It was the
unaccustomed on shore. In fact, water is a better conductor of sound
Nemo? From this collection of portraits could I finally unravel the
such a shock would have been fatal if Captain Nemo had thrown the full
then hangs all of us by the neck from the tip of a mainmast yardarm!”
Nemo. Conseil and I no longer left each other.
renewed care. Each man wanted one last look with which to sum up his
spotted some seashells, tube worms, lively annelid worms from the
for an instant. Nobody on board seemed to be making any preparations
surface area, 24,448 square miles, in other words, a little smaller
“I can easily believe master,” Conseil replied. “But what crowds of
furnish a meat that’s highly prized.
wonderful sample of natural architecture. Then, among this basaltic
slowed down, and the sculls dipped noiselessly into the tranquil
streaks in the air before plunging into the murky waters like so many
ongoing schemes to escape from the Nautilus. These unifying threads
“Yes,” Ned Land went on. “You can repay your debt by coming with me
before it could leave its coral bed.
none terribly edible.
steward was choking in the grip of those powerful hands.
probably in bed. Neither the mechanics or the crewmen will be able to
back!”
anchors, eyelets from pulleys, swivel guns, an eighteen-pound shell,
platform. I climbed its metal steps, passed through the open hatches,
hour. If, during our trip, we were able to identify these different
was best not to meet him face to face! Best to try and forget him! And
days. Magnificent sturgeons, nine to ten meters long and extremely
Some big dogfish also passed by, a voracious species of shark if there
sharks of various species including a fifteen-foot glaucous shark with
his readings of hour angles. Out of habit I waited for him to
large stay of its foremast. Hazy flickerings were reflected on its
near latitude 44 degrees north, this current divides into two arms;
How I wished I could take this superb bird of paradise back to Paris,
to be eaten, I see no great harm!”
to greet this news with unfeigned satisfaction.
even the swiftest fish or birds could keep up with us, and the natural
“Sir, I understand perfectly how your nets can furnish excellent fish
and me at the lounge window. The sea was lit by our beacon’s electric
rises with prodigious speed to the surface of the sea. I then open the
This animal had been unable to escape the teeth of those sperm
prehistoric times; today, turned to stone, transformed into carbon
fading swiftly. But after thinking it over, I realized that these
short, the freedom we ourselves enjoy, my companions and I.”
However, to the Abraham Lincoln’s credit, it must be said that we
didn’t agree with Captain Nemo.
a style of hunting with which you aren’t yet familiar. We’ll take no
infinite order of animals totaling more than 13,000 species, of which
Nemo. Among the works of Joseph Bertrand, his book entitled The
this lagoon through a natural channel that opens ten meters below the
considerable crowd. I left instructions for shipping my containers of
Then our conversation petered out, and each of us withdrew into his
As for the dead or dying man, he hadn’t come into the picture. I
relevant details on the Gulf Stream. When my explanation was over, I
in the ballast tanks. The Nautilus began to sink on a vertical line,
At 10:35 Captain Nemo left the steering wheel and turned to me:
then, the firm base of the sandy mountains on the coast. For an hour
All day long on May 31, the Nautilus swept around the sea in a series
with beady eyes, poised to spring at me. Although my diving suit was
“That doesn’t necessarily follow,” I said. “The arms and tails of
calm again. The ease with which I could move increased my confidence,
planets accompanying our globe around the sun, and we’ll never become
William Beebe, polar traveler Sir Ernest Shackleton. Likewise
coast during the night, the Nautilus lay west of the bay, or rather
him. His face looked exhausted; his reddened eyes hadn’t been
fair, the skies reasonably clear, the cold quite brisk, namely -12
relations with Havana.”
semblance of it before our eyes. Before the Nautilus’s spur there lay
navigator John Davis, who gave them the name Davis Southern
“Whenever you’re ready, sir,” he called to me.
gradients. Mile after mile it was growing thinner.
feet high. To the naturalist’s eye, its gracefully rounded crown,
to an end.”
established me as a specialist in this pretty obscure field of natural
and in this locality the liquid strata hid enough to make the fortunes
“And this accident came about . . . ?”
Newfoundland is the mouth of a large gulf, and the St. Lawrence
no overlapping scales. On impact, it gave off a metallic sonority, and
reputation of the company to which this ship belonged, the event
If you would like to join the expedition on the Abraham Lincoln, the
the yellow sponge from Syria, the horn sponge from Barbary, etc. But
of certain microscopic buds, rudimentary diatoms made up of a type of
An enormous mass was sinking beneath the waters, and the Nautilus,
hideous pitching movement, the Nautilus reared its steel spur into the
pleasure, he jiggled around inside his carapace in the world’s
captain replied.
latest model breech-loading cannon, very heavy of barrel and narrow of
. . .”
pushing on to the South Pole. He greeted my announcement with the
gallant Ned, do you know how many square centimeters you have on your
not be patched, and with its paddle wheels half swamped, the Scotia
collector in front of an aquarium.
I had one question left to address to Captain Nemo.
sense of smell. Dorados from the genus Sparus, some measuring up to
imprisoned waters. Here they found merely a passageway for going from
of 1,200 meters, by that point tolerating a pressure of 120
continents. I’ll spare you the innumerable hypotheses with which we’ve
We were alone. Where? I couldn’t say, could barely even imagine. All
scorpionfish whose heads are adorned with stings and which have only
Mt. Sarmiento, whose elevation is 2,070 meters above sea level: a
“Oh, professor, it won’t get any hotter unless we want it to!”
I attach a print of the positive. In it you can view these primordial
Our forecastle cannon was immediately loaded and leveled. The
“Precisely, and that’s what I came to tell you—”
boilers, then hulls floating in midwater, here upright, there
Just then Captain Nemo opened a door facing the one by which I had
the foot of the ladder, a door opened and instantly closed behind us
1. A Runaway Reef
to rocks, where they’re strongly attached by a mass of brown filaments
themselves. They were howling not in anger but in glee.
“All right,” the Canadian said, “then why should there be any more
plans.”
whiskers like those on a cat, its webbed and clawed feet, its bushy
“Oh, bravo! Bravo three times over, captain! That explains the
Aronnax, you’ll see for yourself that during these underwater hunting
topmost level the vegetable kingdom began to challenge the mineral
go with it, or at least some vegetables.”
“Electricity!” I exclaimed in some surprise.
“Perhaps it would be the right of a savage,” I replied. “But not that
filaments, because they were both very soft and very warm. So the
d’Entrecasteaux in 1792, by Louis-Isidore Duperrey in 1823, and by
symptoms. Some crewmen were at their last gasp.
it swelled a little toward the south. Five miles still separated it
“Yes. We could have been crushed between these masses of ice, or at
foregoing conversation directly concerning them. When I told them we
Just then the seafloor began to slope sharply downward. The light took
azure tassels and shaded us from the sun’s rays, plus jellyfish of the
because the somersaulting block, shifting little by little, had found
And now I knew where Captain Nemo had delivered those millions, when
made up of three-tenths shame and seven-tenths fury. The crew called
and Smith’s soundings prove that in the past, these two continents
just that with the Nautilus, as they had once done with the vessels of
treasures, we left the island beach and half an hour later pulled
free aboard my vessel, so no part of the Nautilus is off-limits to
European seas. As we swung around the Emerald Isle, I spotted Cape
believe the average time underwater that these fishermen can tolerate
observe both the inside and topside of this highly unusual sea.
“Our path is barred to the south?” I asked him.
surface, and by numerous tropic birds of the genus Phaeton, among
still to wait! A half hour of nightmares that could drive me insane!
companion was suddenly toppled by the tentacles of a monster he could
spotted him standing on a chunk of basalt. His instruments were beside
local items, the pure indigo of its warm waters sharply contrasting
“Yes, yes!”
120,000 francs in our currency.”
Just then, in the last light of a moon settling on the horizon, I
history. My views were in demand. As long as I could deny the reality
approaching without any possibility of my holding it in check. After
“Professor Aronnax, we’re in longitude 137 degrees 15’ west—”
compressed-air device, the mechanics activated the start-up
such pains to cut through his isthmus!”
conditions houses topple, roof tiles puncture doors, iron railings
Ned Land was also brandishing an enormous harpoon he had stowed in the
found for this valuable force. It lights us, and with a uniformity and
“You said we’d be free aboard your vessel?”
sort of safe that contained a large number of ingots.
just brought aboard his vessel, whose life he had held in the balance:
animal parted company with its tail; and deprived of this adornment,
from 2,620 fathoms, hence from a depth of more than one vertical
sticking under the mollusk’s folds some piece of glass or metal that
“That,” he told me, “is a gaseous discharge caused by our use of
of Brazil, the Royal Academy of Science in Berlin, the British
wonderment grew when we saw huge marine animals cavorting in it, like
reefs than for the savage inhabitants of its coasts. It separates
by means of powerful levers. If these fins stay parallel with the
This name was magic! It was the name of those islets where vessels
down and feet in the air.
its beak, were also small. But it offered a wonderful mixture of hues:
As Captain Nemo pronounced these words, I turned to Conseil and Ned
And I too could feel the difference created by the water’s powerful
this brilliant emanation had suddenly dried up. Then it reappeared on
“Roguedom!”
Captain Nemo fell silent and seemed lost in reverie. I regarded him
“Then smoke these cigars whenever you like, without debating their
one finds 96.5% water and about 2.66% sodium chloride; then small
hour, an excessive speed in such a cramped area. But Captain Nemo knew
bound books. These furnishings followed the contours of the room,
only a meter of water, my head passed well above the level of the
“Is it deeply fascinating, this volume master is reading?”
for your table; I understand less how you can chase aquatic game in
their membranes to the wind, letting their blue tentacles drift like
cleared 14,000 leagues, and over this track longer than the earth’s
pastry. You’ve never eaten any, sir?”
nerves were twitching with curiosity for the first time in history.
“Unfortunately,” Ned Land said, “they’ve only given us the standard
“Surely. We’re cruising in a current of boiling water.”
way, my companions went with me. I heard a door with watertight seals
shrimps, daddy longlegs, rock crabs, and a prodigious number of
But as the bushes shrank, the tree forms magnified. Actual petrified
heard of it.”
builder more than the captain himself, you can understand the utter
commanded by La Poype-Vertrieux, it fought valiantly against the
monster of colossal strength; on the other, those favoring an
650-horsepower ships at 1,820 metric tons, and in two more years, by
bits of feldspar. Finally, on March 10, a smaller islet called Reka
ones. A few seamen stayed voluntarily in Vanikoro. The others, weak
CHAPTER 13
than air, and under the waves noises carry four times as fast.
At last on March 18, after twenty futile assaults, the Nautilus was
swollen with protuberances; bristling with stings and strewn with
Captain Nemo did not reply. After some minutes of silence:
the hills with a cetacean’s dexterity. If the labyrinth became
skiff is in place and the hatches are closed. I don’t imagine you’re
hawksbills were still asleep inside their carapaces, a refuge from
sort of gummy flour. This flour was the starch-like sago, an edible
So we returned through the forest, and we completed our harvest by
to us, it would be sheer cruelty to sacrifice my companions to my
and another, when Ned Land stretched his hand toward a point in the
My blood turned cold in my veins! I saw that we were under threat from
“Look.”
walking, and turning around, I saw the crewmen form a semicircle
the slight overlap of its sheet-iron plates, which resembled the
a man who no longer had any doubts. But Conseil was so distracted he
animals. So leave these poor cetaceans alone. They have quite enough
The rain was followed by a downpour of fire. Droplets of water changed
“Because this rifle doesn’t shoot ordinary bullets but little glass
From that day on, I noted with some uneasiness that Ned Land’s
as good as I got.
cemented together by the cold. This obstacle couldn’t stop Captain
them up and they’ll supply all the oxygen we need.”
“With the Ruhmkorff device, Professor Aronnax. If the first is carried
answer him? Captain Nemo remained invisible. After giving the Canadian
Nautilus was fleeing northward at a speed of twenty-five miles per
itself like a human being. Its steel muscles were cracking. Sometimes
They were gold ingots. And they represented an enormous sum of
their bodies strewn with erratic blue speckles and identifiable by
by an Anglo-Saxon, and try for a more favorable result than mine.”
Just then, past the fringes of a large cloud that the wind was driving
the islet of Aphroessa appeared, leaving a ten-meter channel between
with long tails and gleaming with a silvery glow, speedy fish
amidships to its spur: the dining room, 5 meters long and separated
medium, the only setting suitable for the breeding and growing of such
“Because people say so.”
Everything through Electricity
a full circle around it. It measured four to five miles in
of the same narrative, perfectly consistent by and large, established
down!”
That day it was yuletide, and it struck me that Ned Land badly missed
waves, sometimes beneath them, the ship wandered for days amid these
wide mouth of a well. From where we stood, the sky was pretty easy to
to treat you as my enemy.”
speed. Near evening it approached the Falkland Islands, whose rugged
“Over to somebody with better aim!” the commander shouted. “And
were specimens of that dreadful cartilaginous genus that’s divided
stared—I too! I was glued to the window by an irresistible allure!
opportunity to take action. We talked little, being too keyed up. Ned
“How?”
under a different name.”
Magi by Veronese, an assumption of the Virgin by Murillo, a Holbein
for action.” They were quite simple. The manropes that formed a
“First let’s look into this Crespo Island.”
cooked. Yes, I felt myself cooking in actual fact!
Suez. I could clearly make out a high mountain crowning Ras Mohammed
thoughts, and on his own he answered the questions I was itching to
we’re afloat.”
Hawaiian Islands, then cut the Tropic of Cancer at longitude 132
abruptly veering off course, swerving sharply from one tack to
protest, kept taxing his ingenuity to supply us. What’s more, in this
“I don’t say nay.”
indignation.
Mediterranean I could observe most productively belonged to the
Confounded by this lapse into banality, Conseil left his sentence
It was on May 17, about 500 miles from Heart’s Content and 2,800
have shown no such hesitation. He would have seen it as his sworn duty
reliable newspapers; nevertheless, he decided to start on Dillon’s
fate has linked our two lives, I can reveal the results of my
“That’s my assessment,” I replied.
“Wow!” the Canadian replied. “That Essence of Orient must sell for
“Master has no need for my services?”
finally, allow me to offer you some marmalade of sea anemone, equal to
At 10:15 Captain Nemo himself took the helm. Dark and deep, a wide
the seas!
molds.
and Conseil watched the crewmen opening the hatches, while a frightful
pick nearly slipped from my hands. What was the point of this digging
“And why not?”
which every human being has a right. Since fate has brought you here,
deplorable invitation! You would have thought it was an issue of going
plants were carried off from the beaches of Europe and America, then
“streams” when they form long strips.
“Ah!” I put in.
schools of large numbers. Among cartilaginous fish, the most
hand, staying on the defensive.
Louis XIV thought an imperial gesture would suffice to humble the
professor, you won’t regret the time you spend aboard my
surrounding and supporting the Nautilus.
“At least, captain, I know what the major soundings tell us.”
their line of demarcation is so clear that abreast of the Carolinas,
mountains about 2,000 feet high, whose shapes were very whimsically
and by the 27th of the same month, we had cleared the equator on the
the flanks, and streaked with crosswise stripes that disappear when
that—”
gripped by homesickness. Nearly seven months had gone by without our
Nautilus felt no tempest’s fury, and the ship rocked peacefully in the
Moving within the moving element! It was a highly appropriate motto
“Abominable indeed,” I replied, “and hardly suitable for a craft like
random, as if hesitating over which course to follow, but it never
I understood. This was the setting of that battle on October 22,
too?”
leagues.
evaporation, supplied excellent drinking water. Next to this galley
In fact, the mystery of that last afternoon when we were locked in
marketplaces plus twenty-six mosques, and its walls, protected by
be appeased in that fierce heart! May the contemplation of so many
Malaysians, who do a booming business in these birds with the Chinese,
danger to be avoided. The question took an entirely new turn. The
Had I accidentally caused these symptoms of anger? Did this
“right whale,” according to the English), which has no dorsal fin; the
having to contend with him.
darkness reigned in the midst of the waters. Covered with heavy
“that soon we’ll have been imprisoned for three whole months aboard
mist. And soon this mist began to condense into snow.
The Canadian was quite disheartened, having counted on putting his
comparative darkness surrounding us. The seafloor in this forest was
in slumber.
potential has remained quite limited, capable of producing only small
found it accurate in detail but deficient in impact. To convey such
Two miles farther on, we were stopped by a promontory that screened
earth, this sea is a genuine battlefield where Neptune and Pluto still
An important question then popped into my head. Would the Nautilus
ten-billion-franc French national debt!”
“this is a library that would do credit to more than one continental
“You’ll watch me work them, Professor Aronnax. I ask only a little
“Krakens!” Conseil shot back, finishing his word without wincing at
9. The Tantrums of Ned Land
these depths remained incalculable.
platinum griddles a heat that was distributed and sustained with
in other words, I could view only the distant horizons because the
“Yes, sir, clever, daring, and invulnerable! It fears neither the Red
wouldn’t we find open sea at the South Pole just as at the North Pole?
announcement. I wanted to reply to the Canadian, but words failed me.
the fearsome thrashings of the animal’s tail, and even its panting
“Our friend Ned grows disturbing,” Conseil replied.
biconvex glass.”
Xenophon to Michelet, from Rabelais to Madame George Sand. But
“Off we go!” Conseil replied.
at the door opening into the captain’s stateroom.
“Underground!” I exclaimed. “And the Nautilus is still floating?”
a short while.
“Oho! We know that, do we?” Captain Nemo replied in a tone of mild
“Will master,” the gallant lad said to me, “allow me to wish him a
had rebelled against him. During his Egyptian campaign, your General
colleagues took their degrees in medicine, such as Gratiolet,
farthest from the trench, not warmed by the movements of workmen and
next day the ocean resumed its usual appearance.
the other one lost its tail!”
imperceptibly. With each passing year the mollusk’s secretions added
into three subgenera numbering at least thirty-two species: striped
excellent from an edible viewpoint, with an exquisite flavor
distance.
turn into spots of silver, finally eight-meter swordfish from the
“Then, sir, you assume they’ll board the ship?”
to which I joined some pointed star coral, a sort of parasitic
“Obviously,” I replied. “And for the sake of archaeology, let’s hope
Ned Land pulled out his handkerchief to wave it in the air. But he had
Captain Nemo was there waiting for me. He stood up, bowed, and asked
weight equal to the weight of the liquid they displaced, and thanks to
no naturalist, and I doubt that he could tell a bonito from a tuna. In
quickness, avoided a collision, and sank his dagger into its
the world’s woes, men who had sought and found independence in the
the water solidifies. We’ve got to get there first, that’s all.”
The man with calm, gentle eyes listened to me serenely, even
are subdivided into five families: hardshells, burrowers, crayfish,
eighty centimeters long with a circumference of thirty-three
stateroom. I was expecting this visit. He wore an expression of great
gilthead (some banded gilthead with fins variously blue and yellow,
“They’ll feed it during our absence. Anyhow, we’ll leave instructions
isn’t a happy one for me, it will be for him, and vice versa. No
quickly. Their zinc component, for example: how do you replace it,
17. An Underwater Forest
“Professor, I set up my workshops on a deserted islet in
“It remains to be seen,” I said, “whether these forests do contain
lounge, a jet of water, electrically lit, fell back into a basin made
depths with scenic views. This description is based mostly on certain
heavy, waterproof clothes, made from seamless India rubber and
“We were discussing,” he said, “the views of ancient historians on the
defined the global paths of five chief currents: one in the north
with tiny crumbs of seashell. Looming like a long reef, the Nautilus’s
Canadian hated having to eat his words.
I didn’t tell my two companions about this new danger. There was no
the Spanish government had gone to the bottom. Here, whenever he
I followed Captain Nemo, and as soon as I passed through the doorway,
range of underwater flora seemed pretty comprehensive to me, as well
While I was contemplating this inert mass, suddenly a dozen of these
HECTARE Roughly 2.5 acres
it would be completely submerged. That’s what comes about,
three decimeters long, bony fish with transparent scales whose bluish
my traveling kit, my suits, shirts, and socks, don’t bother counting,
then, how much resistance of bone structure and strength of
antennas, undulating triggerfish encircled by little red bands,
FOR SOME DAYS the Nautilus kept veering away from the American
CHAPTER 22
But all earthly things come to an end, all things must pass, even the
have been strong enough to overcome the outside pressure.
observations of hour angles. Then he told me:
long. The museums in Trieste and Montpellier have preserved some
luster with that of ruby and topaz; yellow-tailed gilthead whose flesh
return on board. But fleeing across the New Guinea territories would
bellowed.
the Nautilus soon picked up speed and easily left astern the fastest
“Well, professor,” the Canadian replied, “you can just drop that idea!
This issue settled, I went to find Ned Land. I wanted to take him with
near him, but half in the shadows.
wonders extinguish the spirit of vengeance in him! May the executioner
Napoleon Bonaparte discovered traces of this old canal in the Suez
“Perfectly clear,” I said, not yet knowing why I was being given this
“What event was that?” Ned Land asked.
“Where? I don’t know. When? I can’t say. Or, rather, I suppose it will
mers. This is accurately translated as Twenty Thousand Leagues Under
“No,” I said, “a choir of walruses.”
mooring where they were waiting for their departure time. When the
with the relish of a smoker who hasn’t had a puff in days.
“Begging master’s indulgence,” Conseil replied, “but our friend Ned is
Paris, its engine by Krupp in Prussia, its spur by the Motala
this data with the fact that the Nautilus must rise to the surface
gauge in silence, then went and put his finger on the world map at a
the Ottoman Empire!
But that damned animal also did a speed of 18.5.
Cook. A man wise but unlucky! Braving the ice banks of the South Pole,
“Hence, Captain Nemo, this isn’t the first time you’ve gone through
Saxony, Bohemia, and France.”
alternately rise and fall above the waves, five miles from the
fuel, they offer me inexhaustible coal mines.”
know more about Mars than we know about the oceans.” This reality
as he saw me, he came over, graciously offered me a cigar, and said to
high-pressure tanks and then dispense it according to his crew’s
and without a trace of an accent. His phrasing was clear, his words
perfect taste. Each utensil, spoon, fork, knife, and plate, bore on
“Then, sir, with your permission, I’ll bid you good evening.”
to go with you.”
Dillon guessed that the ships at issue were those under the Count de
A request to this effect was presented to the commander. The commander
I arrived at the corner door of the lounge. I opened it gently. The
forgotten like so many others, if three weeks later it hadn’t been
short, I can admire you and comfortably go with you while playing a
fragile partitions could break; but strong copper bands secured them,
Ned Land was not mistaken. We were in the presence of a ship whose
Just then I was studying a delightful book by Jean Macé, The Servants
hands with an air of discouragement.
quickly, my eyes literally ached, just as if we had experienced the
powers are greater than man’s destructive instincts. True to those
Wouldn’t he see my four-month silence as a tacit acceptance of this
“Could there be a fire on board?” I wondered.
platform.
A New Proposition from Captain Nemo
ice, the battle with the devilfish, the storm in the Gulf Stream, the
The captain glanced at the chart. Then, turning to me:
on March 16 near eight o’clock in the morning. Ice completely
man-eaters?”
lake, but it’s an unpredictable lake with fickle waves, today kindly
agitated. It needed to sink to fifty meters, searching for a resting
Sea; green pearls from the rainbow abalone; yellow, blue, and black
Pole—even more unattainable than the North Pole, which still hadn’t
stave off two Frenchmen and a Canadian!”
Among others I noted that sand goby mentioned by Aristotle and
Given such a complete collection from the seas of Japan and China, I
trace of a door or window. Going around the opposite way, Conseil met
I was about to leave the lounge when Captain Nemo entered. He
As we moved forward, I heard a kind of pitter-patter above my
prison and never dreaming he would need to reenter it.
classified into fish we eat and fish we don’t eat!”
me. He had caught me on my weak side, and I momentarily forgot that
organisms—nature has certainly saved one of her most prodigious sights
brown backs striped in blue and edged in gold, handsome dorados,
nor sea. The hurricane was unleashed at a speed of forty-five meters
I got up at six o’clock in the morning. The hatches weren’t open. So
were deceased Indian villagers who hadn’t been fully devoured by
ships down into the depths. Those beasts go by the name of krake—”
“But when you want to set out, don’t you have to return to the surface
Islands. Later Sir Richard Hawkins called them the Maidenland, after
a few hours. The moon shone in the midst of the constellations at
lounge. We were racing north-northeast with frightful speed, fifty
Captain Nemo showed me a tin box, stamped with the coat of arms of
him? How could I hide the involuntary horror he inspired in me? No! It
blood; energy, shown by the swiftly knitting muscles of his brow; and
located 150 meters down. Thanks to the perfection of our equipment, we
“But my gallant Ned,” I told him, “the forests of Crespo Island are
“They’re thermometric sounding lines that report water temperatures in
“Professor, these same instruments are found in my stateroom, where
Conseil’s unflappable composure cheered me up. I swam more vigorously,
indicates how fast the Nautilus is going. An electric wire puts it in
workshops in Sweden, its precision instruments by Hart Bros. in New
over on its back. Our skiff rejoined it, took it in tow, and headed to
The hatch lids fell back onto the outer plating. Twenty horrible faces
in the autumn of 1869 and the summer of 1870. Although prior English
TON, METRIC Roughly 2,200 pounds viii
heavy sheet iron in which I store air under a pressure of fifty
in their six waistbands), trumpetfish with flutelike beaks that looked
beyond the reach of human eyes. Quite naturally, I led our
pearls were spread out, the electric light flecking them with little
alone have the right to appreciate. Therefore I obey none of its
Tertullian, Engel, Scherer, Tournefort, Buffon, and d’Avezac; I had
seal that are known as quebrantahuesos,* and cape pigeons, a sort of
of those fisheries?”
“Did you hear that?” I muttered.
might be listening to us? Instead, let’s try to find out where we
substance chiefly consumed by the Melanesian peoples.
than a kind and generous man like yourself!”
attracting power extends a distance of fifteen kilometers. It can suck
were obviously meant to feed the latter. However, through the windows
left us when we came abreast of the lightship, whose two signal lights
by 350 meters deep, the Gulf Stream moves at the rate of eight
tapestries of austere design. There I saw canvases of the highest
Its fins set vertically, its propeller thrown in gear at the captain’s
short, he was the exact opposite of the Canadian, who knew nothing
“The island of Ceylon,” he said, “is famous for its pearl
have jammed in the grooves of the pulleys. Only a craft without sails,
“But it must be a long, hard job, sorting out these pearls by size,”
four days to see the undertaking through to completion.
question” inflamed all minds. During this memorable campaign,
companions, or, despite my better judgment, as I sometimes wished that
These graceful mollusks were swimming backward by means of their
Captain Nemo spoke with winning eloquence. The fire in his eyes and
“Now, professor,” he said, “if you’d like to inspect the Nautilus, I’m
“Ah!” Captain Nemo put in serenely. “They’ve come in their dugouts?”
These Americans refused to give up. The daring Cyrus Field, who had
has no excuse for not setting sail with Commander Farragut. It’s a
alteration? Couldn’t the heart of the ocean hide the last-remaining
expression, “it went out,” like a huge glowworm. Had it fled from us?
For once in his life, the poor lad didn’t address me “in the third
We didn’t leave these Patagonian waterways until April 3, sometimes
“Myself,” Conseil replied, “and at master’s command.”
fireflies that could thoroughly pulverize a man in their iron jaws! I
human mind dotes on objects of wonder, you can understand the
But on the 26th, appeased with gifts and seeing that they didn’t need
April 9, we raised South America’s easternmost tip, Cape São
Ned needed no persuading and started our story all over again, most of
Captain Nemo was waiting for me.
north Pacific.
Gueboroa Island, its coastline curving north to west like an immense
I was not mistaken. Unlocking noises became audible, a door opened,
his changed disposition, and especially his total silence since the
all those thousands of ships setting out from Glasgow or Liverpool.
because it seems the moon will have the good nature to float us away!”
nothing except a strong eddy breaking three cable lengths out, as if
paying you this second visit. After discovering your identities, I
“Did master ring for me?” Conseil replied.
with nyctalopic eyes, whose ability to see in the dark increased their
“Here, Professor Aronnax, is a manuscript written in several
of some 100 ferries and tenders.*
its slanting fins, the Nautilus successively reached depths of 3,000,
lion’s paws, peacock’s tails, and Neptune’s gloves—designations
clarity through the wide-open panels. No shadows, no blurs, thanks to
Pacific, a fourth in the south Pacific, and a fifth in the southern
slices of sea cucumber, that praiseworthy zoophyte, all garnished with
continuously by the many steamers providing service between the Gulf
with propellers.
CHAPTER 5
length. It was divided, by function, into two parts: the first
in these icy waterways. These animals know by instinct how to gouge
A sudden jolt threw me down. The Nautilus had just struck a reef, and
“Not in the least.”
walk. But this didn’t alarm me, and I just let it sleep off its
This “et cetera” won’t keep me from mentioning one more fish that
Inside the Mediterranean, then, I could catch no more of its
ventured today into such a blind alley as the Red Sea.”
night before, I didn’t get up until eleven o’clock. I dressed
efforts of a rival organization.”
zones, brings about a constant interchange of tropical and polar
towering, inflated by long swells. Every bird had disappeared except a
for departure.
December 21. At that time, the summer solstice of these southernmost
then grew fantastically. His features were accentuated, taking on
But I couldn’t linger. Captain Nemo, on familiar terms with these
it in the play of their colors and in those fleeting reflections that
instruments of physical measure—”
if I was to die smothered and crushed by this water turning to stone,
science.
square with the strength of electricity. Until now, its dynamic
atmospheres? How do you rise back to the surface of the ocean?
tropical regions, which experience no real dawn or dusk. The sun’s
just then. I touched him with my hand and pointed to the walls of our
populous shores offered ready refuge everywhere. The sea was plowed
Sea, the Kara Sea, the Gulf of Ob, the Lyakhov Islands, or those
riblike ridges on their arching summits, triton shells pocked with
flavor, knifejaws with bony beaks, yellowish albacore that were as
swiftly. Soon we had cleared the Antarctic Circle plus the promontory
“In fact,” I said, “Mr. Land is right. And if we ever brought back to
midwater.
Nautilus’s sailor. Captain Nemo alerted his companion to this hideous
As for me, I didn’t lag behind the others and I yielded to no one my
pyramid-shaped block of shale with a very sharp summit, which,
From this moment on, for nineteen days from February 23 to March 12,
retreat, and since we definitely were not mollusks, we had to clear
only to put it to the test. But how will we reach the bottom of the
chief officer kept answering with flat assurances. At least that’s
hand-hurled harpoon, to the blunderbuss firing barbed arrows, to the
underwater Monitor was ultimately rejected.
more than -10 degrees. Two degrees had already been gained. Thanks to
“Come along, then. This way, you’ll learn the full story about this
to judge from this ship whose soul he was, which reflected his every
officer were born in the low latitudes. There must be southern blood
Nautilus’s captain could read fluently whatever volumes he chanced to
“Now then,” I went on, “the Nautilus’s capacity is 1,500 metric tons,
three quintillion metric tons. To appreciate such a number, we should
fascination the fish just hauled on board. The Antarctic seas serve as
professor, these books are at your disposal, and you may use them
Nemo led me to the galley where a huge distilling mechanism was at
to the Antipodes, doesn’t it mean: I’m hungry, give me a bite to eat!”
“That’s indeed considerable,” I said. “But you must admit that certain
“How will they manage that?”
aboard. And what a way to die! Smashed, strangled, crushed by the
“To each his own,” the captain replied, staring intently at Ned Land.
The captain stretched out on a couch, and I mechanically took a seat
“No problem,” the Canadian went on insistently.
had come back up loaded with a variety of fairly ordinary seashells,
drawing on my reserve stock of sodium. We’ll stay here long enough to
instantaneous, and no squadron of ships ever maneuvered with greater
“Without your noticing it. And if you aren’t crushed by so much
“On the contrary, professor,” the harpooner replied, not wanting to
would have been fatal to us.
creation, the prototype not only for countless renegade scientists in
is An Underwater Tour of the World, so in good travelog style, the
While he took his sights with his sextant, one of the Nautilus’s
his gaze, which gave a unique emphasis to his facial appearance.
Nautilus passed between them, covering them with sheets of
their divers will ransack so daringly. This bay is felicitously laid
appearance was changing by the day. His moods grew gloomier and
the Indian Ocean, then orange-hued lucina with circular shells,
seals, are designed to graze the underwater prairies, destroying the
Overlaid with silver dish covers, various platters had been neatly
soon as he saw me, he came over.
floating substance, be put into a basin, and a circular motion be
common off Corsica. This Wailea oysterbank must have been extensive,
deepest seas.”
lead the way.”
Manin, the Italian patriot; Abraham Lincoln, dead from the bullet of a
of sea cucumber that a Malaysian would declare to be unrivaled in the
profound darkness. Saturated with the outside light, my eyes couldn’t
expert engineer: “A well-constructed hull can defy any sea!” This
Five meters away a shadow appeared and dropped to the seafloor. The
practical people, especially in America and England, were determined
These were the historical memories that Captain Nemo’s scrawl sent
At 6:30 Ned Land entered my stateroom. He told me:
when condensing, would submerge the temperate zones. Salts play a
sea. Nothing on the horizon, except near four o’clock in the afternoon
pistons groaned and pushed the tie rods of the drive shaft. The blades
and if his vessel didn’t go down, it was thanks to the circumstance
could then see our images clearly mirrored on the underside of the
“Scum!” the captain shouted. “Do you want to be nailed to the
“Shoot, you demented vessel! Shower your futile shells! You won’t
turtles. Their tenacity was so great, they would rip apart rather than
carefully.
The shell reached its target; it hit the animal, but not in the usual
became its most energetic opponents. This reaction mounted upward from
Some of these wrecked ships had perished in collisions, others from
“The Nautilus is bringing us to Vanikoro?” I asked.
Thoroughly baffled after vainly exhausting our philological resources,
in sight of the coasts of England or Provence, but in the waterways of
polar seas, pulled in a live sea star from a depth of 2,500 meters. We
fifteen meters, enabling it to return quickly to the surface of the
I stared at Captain Nemo in definite astonishment, and I answered him:
every species, more numerous than birds in the air, more agile too;
Sir:
tremendously fast; but although of moderate dimensions, they at least
with it a crew of corpses dragged under by fearsome eddies. . . .
sole, turbot, dab, plaice, brill, etc.”
The Lightning Bolts of Captain Nemo
casualties. From the coast of Algiers to the beaches of Provence, how
In his uncontrollable glee, I think the Canadian might have
cetaceans with thrusts from a spur! Who ever heard of such malarkey!
the wheel. Outside, the sea was brightly lit by the beacon shining
And so it turned out. The Nautilus took full advantage of this
through the crystal waters, specifically five or six of those zodiacal
he was taking full advantage of them. In my selfish personal
and arrived topside on the Nautilus.
emotionless than Conseil when I told the fine lad our intention of
our adventures more authentic—and much more rewarding.”
oysters, and a dozen small turtles that we saved for the ship’s
assume this wealth goes to waste when I’m the one amassing it? Do you
Sea; and reptiles by virgata turtles belonging to the genus Chelonia,
one real difficulty.”
Our visit to this opulent giant clam came to an end. Captain Nemo left
an avalanche. To our right and left there were carved gloomy galleries
was a bathroom, conveniently laid out, with faucets supplying hot or
vehicle for a prodigious, unearthly mode of existence; it’s simply
that and classified this monster among such amphibious reptiles as
“Good enough!” Ned Land put in. “If it isn’t the right bird, it’s
“At least a hundred.”
fresh meat fade away. “And you, Professor Aronnax, are you going to
The captain stood up and invited me to follow him. I’d had time to
pair belonging to our Canadian.
longer speaking, it was bellowing. Bending from the waist, he shook
“Yes, my gallant Ned,” Conseil replied. “And note well, even when one
like a soap bubble; several varieties of watering-pot shell from Java,
After our position fix, the Nautilus’s latitude bearings were
I returned to the lounge. The hatch closed, and I heard water hissing
liberator of enslaved races? Had he figured in the recent political or
exploring.”
extraordinary precision.
strand, after successfully clearing the ring of coral that surrounds
shore, these tree forms become attached to rocks on the seafloor by
surface, without the helmsman in the bow seeing a thing.”
no longer an inert mass, and I had, comparatively speaking, great
since the Nautilus’s commander seems to be taking no precautions. And
water—which wasn’t what Ned Land had in mind. Among the foods we were
as bait for catching cod.
navigators have cruised through milk seas for more than forty miles.”
pierce those sheets of water so opaque to our eyes and scan the
speckles. Often these powerful animals rushed at the lounge window
board—it’ll have a slightly tart flavor, but you’ll find it
yellowish fins stippled in brown and the left topside mostly marbled
contained the cells for generating electricity, the second that
gratify the whims of fashion. But tell me, captain, how many oysters
breathe each morning, free towns if ever there were, independent
men could call him to account for his actions. God, if he believed in
naturalist.
stumps of three masts, chopped off two feet above the deck, indicated
cyclostomes but whose lower jaw is free-moving. This order, which is
shot out of this inexplicable object and sprang hissing into the air
words pronounced in my ear:
his death on February 14, 1779. By then we had fared 4,860 leagues
creature, from “Moby Dick,” that dreadful white whale from the High
“Professor Aronnax,” Captain Nemo replied serenely, “the Nautilus’s
unknown; in the midst of their gloomy rubble, the Nautilus navigated
conversation around to the giant unicorn, and I weighed our
“Nothing, sir,” the Canadian replied. “He said you’d already discussed
Arctic regions, to the stupendous kraken whose tentacles could entwine
human being can lay claim. Accordingly, their scaly ancestors infest
jaws wide open!
to a halt. Then they tried to haul the monster on board, but its
with emerald ribbons and dressed in velvet and silk, golden angelfish
could barely cope with this dizzying rush, and the waves battered us
CONSEQUENTLY, above, below, and around the Nautilus, there were
of implacable hate at the ship bearing down on them. You could feel
door was closed. By this point the Nautilus was resting on a bed of
in explaining the underwater wonders to me; now he left me to my
orange snails from the genus Pleurobranchus that looked like eggs
The silence was further disturbed only by the pounding of my heart.
tranquility! There, sir. There’s the ideal ship! And if it’s true that
success, and not a sailor on board would have bet against the narwhale
Nautilus slumbered in the wilderness of the ocean.
the whole submerged continent of Atlantis. The floor of this immense
day it did a diagonal dive by means of its slanting fins, reaching
fine-grained sand. Fire had polished the sparkling enamel of its inner
eyes, I reopened them and saw that this luminous force came from a
such precision, they seemed to be standing still, and I could have
pronounced in French, left me deeply stunned! So I had a fellow
“No, sir, it’s an act of mercy! You’re my prisoners of war! I’ve cared
couldn’t raise them. A morbid sleep, full of hallucinations, seized my
“Come on, it’s your turn,” I told the harpooner. “Over to you,
waters. Stationed in the lounge, the captain and I watched the needle
called a halt so that we could turn and start back. No. With a gesture
most of it.
naturally led into mentioning the sea’s gigantic animals. The former
sufficiently raise these masses of water and do me a favor for which
the original French texts published in Paris by J. Hetzel et Cie.—the
almost entirely madreporic, but certain dry stream beds were strewn
rudder separated from the sternpost and still hanging from an iron
the waters: jets of liquid rising like hundreds of magnificent
the Nautilus fell in with a herd of baleen whales. This encounter
feet long; its enormous mouth occupied a third of its body. It was an
the pole?
seamen’s hearts. But since you seem to have made a special study of
During this period the fish Conseil and I observed differed little
“Me?” the Canadian replied. “I’m a professional harpooner! It’s my job
you, turban snails with shells made of horn and bristling all over
either sinks on a diagonal as steep as it suits me, or rises on that
“Ned my friend,” I said, “here’s my reply. You have right on your side
and his companions were replaced by new workmen, including Conseil and
prodigious speed; delicious sailfish that can hoist their fins in a
underwater rocks or underwater machines, it must have been caused by
iodine! I opened my mouth wide, and my lungs glutted themselves on the
undo the bolts holding the skiff to the submersible, and the longboat
It was six o’clock. I found the weather overcast, the sea gray but
thousands. These were petrels, cape pigeons, or puffins, and their
involuntarily looked around for old Proteus, that mythological
One of these chieftains came fairly close to the Nautilus, examining
belong to tyrants. On its surface they can still exercise their
“Tertio,” Conseil said, “the subbrachians, whose pelvic fins are
representative in this undertaking. Commander Farragut has a cabin at
shallows than in the open sea.
entomostraceans. And in order to complete his study of marine
like. So till I have proof to the contrary, I’ll deny that baleen
“My gallant Ned, as yet that country isn’t clearly marked on maps of
9. A Lost Continent
CHAPTER 11
“Ships? I doubt it,” I replied. “However, they say that in 1820, right
in a semicircle.
“Like a log, professor. But I must be imagining things, because it
makes you dizzy to lean over their surface. There the Nautilus
possible. The naval arsenals were unlocked for Commander Farragut, who
I made my way to the central companionway, which led to the
Just then the Gulf Stream’s speed was 2.25 meters per second. So
seem short of air!
I rushed to the window and saw crusts of coral: fungus coral,
ship, facing the ocean’s perils, danger lurks everywhere; on the
168 degrees. At the moment of our noon sights, we passed fairly close
saw the nearly drowned man regain consciousness little by little. He
degrees, twenty-two and a half degrees of latitude were left to cross,
I’ll let you assess the degree of anger consuming our impatient Ned
Meanwhile some twenty of the Nautilus’s sailors—all energetic,
or breakfast, not one puny meal has arrived!”
“Professor, when I proposed that you go hunting in my Crespo forests,
all, and we jumped into it too hastily. What a waste of time, what a
hour. The propeller churned the waves with mathematical regularity,
I showed Conseil the position of this long reef on our chart of the
delightful pteropods, true butterflies of the sea.
There, between its leaflike folds, I saw a loose pearl as big as a
Nautilus. It was for him, for him alone, that America had yielded up
rocks that make it nearly impossible to navigate. Consequently,
tumble at the expense of my backside. Conseil, more cautious or more
But I mustn’t let these fantasies run away with me! Enough of these
water from left to right, right to left. But spotting that they swam
prison and put to sleep, the captain’s violent precaution of snatching
terraces and ending in sharp peaks.
gaze on an object, his eyebrow lines gathered into a frown, his heavy
room; in this cell we were to get dressed for our stroll.
bits of rubble twenty to twenty-five feet long, which formed reefs
water. The sea was starting to congeal everywhere. Numerous blackish
specimen. I overcame the horror that its appearance inspired in me,
fisherman’s hands? This magnificent benefaction from the Man of the
measured 100 meters stem to stern. Now then, the biggest whales, those
4,000 individuals are destroyed annually.
helter-skelter unpredictability typical of a river’s surface a short
surface.
lower, plus two big canines shaped like the fleur-de-lis. Among them
forgot everything else, and without another thought of exhaustion,
are in great demand. Accordingly, walruses are the victims of a
“Well put,” the Canadian replied. “We deserve two meals, and speaking
The word “Enter!” answered me. I did so and found Captain Nemo busy
encrusted, others newer and reflecting our beacon light on their
points of purchase on both side walls and had gotten jammed between
“Then what can you do?”
In wonderment, we leaned on our elbows before these show windows, and
Two months earlier we would have enjoyed perpetual daylight in this
western tip of the Gulf of Carpentaria. Reefs were still numerous but
ruin things for us with pointless violence. Who knows whether they
gave the ground plan, cross section, and side view of the
to reach the Indian Ocean via the Torres Strait. This was the extent
favorable current like so many unfurled sails; splendid nurseryfish on
own and had laid the same claim to it that, in the first days of the
extremely dangerous. There were Port Jackson sharks with a brown back,
afternoon, this agonizing sensation affected me to an intense
“Probably, Conseil. But as for me, I’m bound and determined not to
element, how can the writer’s pen hope to reproduce them?
audible.
I hadn’t seen the captain since our visit to the island of
seas. It returned to the surface of the waves, so our daily strolls on
vertical currents, which are caused by differences in the water’s
having any news from shore. Moreover, Captain Nemo’s reclusiveness,
simply to contemplate the works of our Creator in the midst of the
Leagues Under the Oceans.
my own two hands.”
seas keep their secrets. We’ve seen progress in sonar, torpedoes, and
feel it assuming an oblique position, lowering its stern and raising
futile expense of emotion! Six months ago we could have been back in
at its summit?”
interrupting:
know “his Red Sea” by heart. “To a modern ship, well rigged, solidly
southernmost regions, because July in this zone corresponds to our
inside the Nautilus.
nationality of this eccentric man who had boasted of having none? His
green and red running lights, plus the white lantern hanging from the
hours in slumber.”
blocks of lava that testified to all the fury of those plutonic
known as topes, twelve feet long and especially feared by divers, were
The night passed without mishap. No doubt the Papuans had been
From January 21 to the 23rd, the Nautilus traveled at the rate of 250
hurricanes, strewn with inhospitable islands, and ‘with nothing good
whale.
“I can easily believe it,” Conseil said.
straight for the animal. Unconcerned, the latter let us come within
meshes a number of fish whose heads were topped by little oval slabs
belonging to the order Lutianida, sacred fish for the Greeks, who
18. The Devilfish
jetties of Port Said stretching out to sea.”
See, right now it’s ten o’clock in the morning.”
an air balloon into the sky. Vibrating resonantly, it knifed through
jewelfish, trumpetfish, blennies, gray mullet, wrasse, smelt, flying
left a footprint here.”
some of this fruit to take with us when we go back.”
“Oh great!” put in the disappointed harpooner, watching his dreams of
cries, black rudderfish like those I’ve already discussed, blue
Captain Nemo led me to the Nautilus’s stern, and passing by Ned and
the 50th meridian with considerable speed. Would it go to the pole? I
worth 500,000,000 francs.”
I then considered leaving my stateroom. Was I free or still a
position on the chart, and pronounced just one word:
glimmers. Among mollusks and zoophytes, I found in our trawl’s meshes
proboscis, equipped with 1,700 organs of locomotion, snaking through
Like a covey of snipe over a marsh, there rose underfoot schools of
supporting cast is shrewdly drawn: Professor Aronnax, the career
everything, I thought that Captain Nemo must have kept up some type of
Meanwhile, furious at these goings on, Ned Land gave free rein to his
the greatest beauty, sea fans from the genus Pavonacea with long
the world of it.
leagues in twenty-four hours, hence 540 miles at twenty-two miles per
stayed on the platform. He observed these deserted waterways
“Certainly, captain.”
grayish, belly and throat white, feet red. Also caught were a couple
populated shore, what would happen to Ned Land’s plans?
intend to let us die of starvation.
on the world map and quoted me this verse from Virgil:
officers were already perched on the mastheads.
March, and for thirty days some 300 boats concentrate on the lucrative
Newfoundland. These banks are the result of marine sedimentation, an
couldn’t resist asking it.
of madrepores known by the names fire coral, finger coral, star coral,
it’s an actual mermaid!”
accomplished every twelve hours, it would still take five nights and
slope. Our engines tried to offer resistance by churning the waves
also mention some quadrangular trunkfish topped by four large
“Your stateroom adjoins mine,” he told me, opening a door, “and mine
nerves! You’re everlastingly calm! You’d say your after-meal grace
Temple of Hercules, buried undersea, as Pliny and Avianus have
rested serenely, sheltered from the sea’s motions, under a pressure
staying as Mr. Land about making his escape. Thus, if this new year
Conseil.
“Yes, captain, maybe so. But whatever resistance to crushing the
was classifying his head off. Polyps and echinoderms abounded on the
agreeable to going with our friend Ned.”
“Primo, the cyclostomes, whose jaws are fused into a flexible ring and
shadows, birds of prey soared and whirled, flying away from nests
I went below just as another projectile scraped the Nautilus’s hull,
basin whose surface area comprises 2,000,000 square kilometers. Even
heading, the Nautilus was bringing us back toward the southeast.
economics—they seemed to be strictly banned on board. One odd detail:
units known as “macciota,” and I noted some wonderful pink samples of
because our hatches stayed open, offering easy access to the
“Am I disturbing you?” I said out of politeness.
Conseil did so, and he was quite astonished to experience no sensation
regret. It wheeled on the skiff, to assault us in its turn.
madman?
shutting them, I looked around. The Nautilus was stationary. It was
“I was afraid to ask,” I replied.
of them were carrying on their shoulders an object that was oblong in
the chains, and do anything to haul us off?”
instant. You couldn’t even find its hiding place behind the curtain of
found a narrow opening into which he brazenly slipped, well aware,
transparency was nothing more than drowned light.
“Stay here, my friends,” I said, stopping them. “Let’s stay together
springtime had been locked up behind that Ice Bank, whose distant
I followed Captain Nemo down gangways located for easy transit, and I
know everything because you haven’t seen everything. Let me tell you,
led to the shaft’s upper end. I asked the captain what this ladder was
spiral-shaped shells, which Cuvier aptly compared to an elegant
was an issue of underwater forests, you thought I’d gone
cons of this question, and it amused him to see you flying off into
“A person can be both a cannibal and a decent man,” Conseil replied,
expedition’s various chances for success or failure. Then, seeing that
his way. I followed him with unshakeable confidence. He seemed like
harvest of these treasures from the sea. Each boat is manned by ten
4. Ned Land
Daylight appeared. The morning mists surrounded us, but they soon
During the day of December 11, I was busy reading in the main
to greater depths. It must have been nearly three o’clock when we
Europeans to shoot back but not to attack first.
lean too far in to be scaled.”
No doubts were possible! This animal, this monster, this natural
inside the longboat and we had only to take our seats.
Going back under the waters, the Nautilus drew near the coast,
set to the northwest, toward the tip of the Indian peninsula.
passion for the unknown. I must go with them, perhaps even guide
“All right, we’ll return, Mr. Land, and after the Persian Gulf, if the
he said nothing to me. For my part, I made no allusion to his escape
Nautilus’s specific gravity. Moreover, in order to come back up, it
continuously under construction in these regions. According to the
pectoral fin triangular, their midback slightly arched, their eyes
and seemed to be sleeping on the surface of the waves, a circumstance
in the afternoon. Just then—was it due to some personal
contrary, we can assume these two spots on the earth feature either a
harpoon the monsters, especially certain smooth-hound sharks whose
. . . !
new assignment. It was a high-speed frigate furnished with
through the open panels, we could unveil the secrets of their aquatic
“Nobody knows.”
popular fiction, but even for such varied figures as Sherlock Holmes
to keep us here forever.”
Revolutionary Calendar, on the 11th and 12th days in the Month of
entire framework.
seats on the ever-deserted platform. In front of us stood the
shores of Novaya Zemlya? Did it visit such uncharted seas as the White
still kept us from distinguishing the colors of its pennant, which was
Abraham Lincoln, and I know where I stand on its speed. But it isn’t
bright spots, iris of the eye encircled in gold, unusual animals that
starvation mustn’t pounce heedlessly on the first food given them. We,
“But some are edible,” the harpooner replied.
the surface of the waves. Then I glimpsed a few bright constellations
“If master says so,” Conseil replied.
it would have been ill-mannered of me to say no. He mixed sulfur with
“All right, get ready for something downright delectable! If you don’t
were self-imposed by more than one who would have cursed such toil
“Branch Mollusca,” Conseil said, “class Acephala, order Testacea.”
waterways of Greece on the morning of February 16, we cleared the
giving them nearly infinite resistance.
his existence might someday be unveiled? But just then I saw this
“I’m not so certain they’ll find it,” Captain Nemo replied icily. “But
bamboo poles that floated on the surface of the water. They were
Just then something hard banged against me. I clung to it. Then I felt
crouching in their lairs, giant lobsters rearing up like spear
and they were already a line of bold fishermen back in the days when
wonderful genus Flabellina as well as the genus Oculina from Réunion
“It’s more than just bread,” the Canadian added. “It’s a dainty
miles per hour.
“Don’t be so irritable, Ned,” I then told the harpooner, “and don’t
people are driven by extreme hunger? This grim possibility took on a
“Precisely, Ned. So at thirty-two feet beneath the surface of the sea,
was stamped with indescribable astonishment.
point in the seas of Japan.
put in occasional appearances.
recognize no superiors! Here I’m free!”
and scientists as Origen, Porphyry, Iamblichus, d’Anville, Malte-Brun,
At the captain’s signal we returned to the bank of shellfish, and
This done, the captain pressed a button whose wiring was in
time. Who knows? Maybe these people have gone without fresh meat for a
patience of you, since you’ll have ample time to be patient. Just
dangled by the dozens. The lower end of each line dragged the bottom
and bottling these Indian waters in the Red Sea.
so far into these southernmost seas, but I repeat: it will go farther
aside throughout Malaysia for the tables of aristocrats. Accordingly,
All these ideas and a thousand others assaulted me at the same
I went back to reading Sirr’s book, but I leafed through it
wait for them as long as possible. Consequently, I decided to divide
WE HAD FINALLY arrived on the outskirts of this forest, surely one of
again. Then he said:
That word “siren” put me back on track, and I realized that the animal
Introduction
submersible, I was finishing my undersea research by the day, and I
extraordinary menu. Sago pasta, bread from the artocarpus, mangoes,
high, the clouds were colored in bright, wonderfully shaded hues, and
visit a different part of the forest.
perpendicular lines, governed by the density of the element that
“No.”
several groups of sea cows were living in family units. These were
phenomenon, that much was unmistakable. Submerged some fathoms below
The Nautilus seemed to be standing still. This was due to the lack of
long ground swells, and I even spotted the foaming “white caps” that
vast properties that I harvest myself, and which are forever sown by
Aha, I thought, so he ventures into the Mediterranean?
surface. So it follows that at 320 feet down, this pressure is equal
“Only with the greatest difficulty, captain, since the season is
invigorating climates in the world.
Canadian, looking rather worried, followed me. Our quick trip through
the beast.
ancient inhabitants of Turkey and Italy; and these valuable animals,
Get there first! By then I should have been used to this type of talk!
about closing; then with his hands he raised the fringed,
capture with extraordinary certainty and precision. In truth, this
reduction would be .00436. Consequently, I’d have to increase my
left panel. Next to this cabinet I saw a chest bound with hoops of
But what part of the globe could this be, this land swallowed by
deck to watch the preparations for getting under way.
spinimane varieties that had probably gone astray in these shallows
of Pyrenees mountain goats.
bask in the heat and light of the sun. They aren’t frequented by
captain pronounced only these words:
May. In the meantime, then, I was busy classifying my mineralogical,
Nautilus), the hapless flying fish always found a dolphin to welcome
what! He ran off, howling in terror and wildly prancing around.
Despite the powerful pressures it was undergoing, the Nautilus sank
raises these two barriers back above the waves!”
for you when, with a single word, I could plunge you back into the
terminology, but in the opposite direction and at a depth of 3,000
hadn’t disturbed the memorial honoring the Count de La Pérouse.
“Captain Nemo, to my every objection you give such crushing answers,
“All,” Captain Nemo answered me, “although these fisheries belong to
and be hideously squeezed between two frozen surfaces?
passed. Followed by his chief officer, Captain Nemo entered the
At six o’clock the day broke suddenly, with that speed unique to
CHAPTER 9
bodies contracted, shells turned over by changing their center of
months not counting refraction, and after its disappearance the long
usefulness is beyond dispute. The sponge is definitely not a plant, as
foundation of rock.”
individual vessel.
uncovered; stationed next to Conseil, I examined the strata
There lay a mystery, but I didn’t insist on exploring it. How could
By then all our past sufferings were forgotten. The memory of that
attitudes toward Captain Nemo grew worse and worse, and I decided to
claim this entire part of the globe, equal to one-sixth of the known
For the next hour our frigate kept up this pace without gaining a
roles, going and fastening themselves onto the breastplates of the
totally absent. The water was fresh and clear, but it was still
European seas.
nature couldn’t adapt to this protracted imprisonment. His facial
reach. As for the temperature in these lower strata, the thermometer
tenacity. Instead of digging all around the Nautilus, which would have
After securely fastening the chest, Captain Nemo wrote an address on
bristling from the shrubbery, crept, or leaned, or stretched on a
Near two o’clock in the morning, the core of light reappeared, no less
lobes found in these intelligent cetaceans. No mammal except man has
per second, hence almost forty leagues per hour. Under these
latitude 70 degrees 30’. Hence we had to transport compasses to
between two watertight bulkheads. An iron ladder, clamped to the wall,
strange domain where the overwrought imagination of Edgar Allan Poe
whether pleasant or unpleasant. But a sliding sound became
abandoning this marvelous Nautilus, leaving my underwater research
marine monster, which had to be purged from the ocean at all cost.”
kilometers per hour. Its speed steadily decreases as it advances
its electricity, sodium to feed its batteries, coal to make its
degrees on February 5, 1832, and Graham Land at latitude 64 degrees
cubic meters of oxygen into the Nautilus’s thin atmosphere.
words, the petrification of forests swallowed by floods—and the
them as if wanting to come to rest, sometimes rising unpredictably to
separated La Pérouse’s islands from the southeastern tip of Papua.
because Captain Nemo didn’t flee into the ocean depths; instead, from
up the first order of aplacental mammals, as Conseil just had to tell
I had been. Our visitors didn’t bat an eye. Apparently they were
“But will we float off?” I asked him.
disaster. Ned Land conceded this himself. So he champed at the bit, in
sheet-iron plates for its hull by Laird’s in Liverpool, its propeller
bluish on the back, whitish on the belly, and all deformed by enormous
“We’re about to depart,” he said.
air. Little did they know what was waiting for them.
prodigiously strong. All that remained was to encase one’s head in its
eccentric individual was simply continuing a conversation we’d already
These observations partly apply here. The subtitle of the present book
“Is that you, professor?”
more dainty game. A covey of terns alighted on the Nautilus. They were
“Ned!” I exclaimed.
sparkled through the transparent windows. I stared.
“Good lads!” the Canadian muttered.
“So,” I said, “our maneuvers are quite simple. We’ll return in our
and “toad ray” that modern fishermen have inflicted on them. Dogfish
locomotive mechanism, and a crew to run it?”
aneurysms. The entire crew suffered from a nervous excitement that
breadth of beam is eight meters. So it isn’t quite built on the
could barely feel the broad undulations of the ocean. A mild breeze
and rounded, the teeth sharp and arranged in several rows, the body
us by Captain Nemo! Because, ultimately, should we detest or admire
smoke, and its deck quaked from the trembling of its boilers.
I repaired to my stateroom. The captain and his chief officer stayed
CHAPTER 13
will remain a secret to you. Go below!”
One resource still left was to speak English. Perhaps they would be
identified his dominant qualities—self-confidence, since his head
rendered himself independent, out of all reach, free in the strictest
average. Often we could chart our course only by guesswork, a less
On February 6 the Nautilus cruised in sight of the city of Aden,
slow, Professor Aronnax.”
the shape of an immense steel fish. Ned Land had clear views on the
Just as it was about to snap up the poor fisherman, the man-eater saw
mezzanine. I went down a short stair leading to the ground floor. I
When I woke up the next day, November 17, I sensed that the Nautilus
What a scene! We stood dumbstruck, hearts pounding, before this
geliniaroidea, classifying it with the natural curiosities in the
fell silent, like someone completely self-absorbed. I regarded him
gulfweed. This gulfweed, the swimming gulfweed or berry carrier, is
“When?” the Canadian asked insistently.
refined, tapered, and to use a word from palmistry, highly “psychic,”
twenty miles to the east.”
the Pacific high seas. Our position fix placed us in latitude 45
out their young and edible shoots, twisting strings of kelp from the
I left him and climbed onto the platform. Conseil and the Canadian
“Yes, Ned, I repeat it with a conviction backed by factual logic. I
meridians of Paris, Greenwich, and Washington, D.C. But in your honor,
The Canadian’s last words caused a sudden upheaval in my brain. I
between 100 and 150 meters. However, from lord-knows-what whim, one
This inquiry was so unexpected that I stared at him a good while
Job—out of faith, not reason. The monster existed, and he had vowed to
Land’s End, it passed between the lowermost tip of England and the
signs of a hurricane on the way. The atmosphere was turning white and
This occurrence, extremely serious in itself, might perhaps have been
“And it’s by luck that you discovered this passageway?” I asked, more
floating in midwater.
strewn with sharp chunks of stone that were hard to avoid. Here the
with his harpoon, had led Commander Farragut to recognize the narwhale
hadn’t yet left their cabin. I invited them to follow me, not telling
“That strikes me as exaggerated,” I replied. “Those animals are only
us into the ocean depths, your characters traveling in diving
ready, and it will take us to the exact spot where we’ll disembark,
*Latin: nemo means “no one.” Ed.
jumped into a carriage.
On January 18 the Nautilus lay in longitude 105 degrees and latitude
capsules invented by the Austrian chemist Leniebroek, and I have a
“In hundreds of thousands of years, my boy.”
Atlantic, 1.026 for the waters of the Pacific, 1.030 for the waters of
one island to another. An escape attempt would have been quite
“Professor Aronnax, would you like me to go find him myself?”
Nemo headed to the door of his stateroom, opened it, and entered. I
ocean, there was no more land in sight. Setting its course to the
alone with the captain in the lounge. Besides, he seemed silent and
densities that lead to currents and countercurrents. Evaporation,
listened, I lived only through my sense of hearing!
positions. It was the regime of verticality.
coconuts heightened our glee. I suspect that my two fine companions
then grew steadily more furious! The mountains of arguments amassed
pierced, distended earlobes there dangled strings of beads made from
“Originally this ship was christened the Marseillais. It carried
in hands made out of marble.
No! I wasn’t the subject of his hate because he wasn’t even looking at
and stony coral. These polyps grow exclusively in the agitated strata
of the compass hanging in the cabin. At a mere gesture from him, the
fear. As if at a signal, every sail was abruptly lowered; arms folded,
straight, his mouth clearly etched, his teeth magnificent, his hands
Meanwhile Captain Nemo had called a halt. My companions and I stopped
head was comparatively small, and its eyes, placed near the opening of
shadows, illusions, melting and evaporating outside their native
These perfected diving suits, it was easy to see, were a far cry from
My mind was made up. The Canadian left me. I went out on the platform,
around their leader. Looking with greater care, I observed that four
lightning right before my eyes!
Just then the luminous globe lighting our cell went out, leaving us in
“My boy,” I replied, “when I expressed the belief that these Papuan
could repay them fully for such devotion.
“If you like, professor.”
Philip V, this aristocrat had to deal with mighty opponents abroad.
“So, until information becomes more abundant, I plump for a sea
“Underwater forests!” I exclaimed.
back out again; but I was mistaken, and much to my surprise, he did
“No, professor,” the captain replied, “I wouldn’t be so
“None, sir. But as for your encounter with the Abraham Lincoln
mystery puzzled me. Finding it impossible to form any views, I drifted
watery deep and no longer belonged to the outside world. All this
gesture that we were dying of hunger.
waters.”
league. Would you still say, Captain Nemo, that we really know
mix them up in my mind. The masters are ageless.”
So it was now urgent to renew the air in our prison, and no doubt the
would be disturbed by no monster of the deep! “No man either!” the
from France, passengers still choose the Cunard line in preference to
equipment would be greater than the quantity you’d extract. It would
it to the aforesaid dimensions.
polypary that often attaches itself to seashells.
figures of speech as personification, symbolism, and misplaced
northernmost regions.
times greater pressure, it’s 175,680 kilograms; at 3,200 feet, or 100
“Ice, ice, and more ice.”
Night fell. A profound silence reigned on board. The compass indicated
sun bird.”
“In order to steer this boat to port or starboard, in short, to make
“I’ll go all out,” Conseil replied. “500,000.”
to another, even to Crete.”
to probe those secrets of yours! But I confess that my curiosity is
ends of this room, and sparkling on their shelves were staggered rows
unfortunate man was swinging in the air at the mercy of this enormous
First division in the polyp group, the class Spongiaria has been
blowing toward shore. You gave me your promise, Professor Aronnax, and
for this insatiable curiosity with my life! What are my discoveries to
“Help!”
I dove into studying the conchological treasures amassed inside the
baleen whales and was preparing to attack. You could tell in advance
If you’re invited to hunt bears in the Swiss mountains, you might say:
you. I turn it all over to you.”
Farragut. No middle of the road for these two.
to go forth. But in all honesty, while imprisoned in these heavy
“Nothing easier,” Captain Nemo said.
marked the decreasing pressures that indicated the Nautilus’s upward
under the same circumstances. It ran like this:
entailed even greater difficulties, Captain Nemo had an immense trench
the other, and we set foot on level sand in a meter and a half of
unique fabric that flattered the figure and allowed great freedom of
fissurella snails, a large species of coastal mollusk.
“Yes, sir. Mixed with mercury, it forms an amalgam that takes the
springings of a vault, supported by natural pillars firmly based on a
creatures, an alarm would instantly sound throughout the colony. The
have to be mounted and adjusted?”
voyage is just beginning, and I’ve no desire to deprive myself so soon
Land had shipped aboard the Abraham Lincoln and asked his help in
eyes framed by red circles. Conseil laid in a supply of them, because
conditions.
catch hold of it, I was hurled into the sea.
for him!”
continent or an ice-free ocean.”
me but especially for Ned Land. Every man, by virtue of his very
So this way of living began to seem simple and natural to us, and we
head. Sometimes this noise increased and became a continuous
inside this boat is vastly preferable to being above it or below it!”
“None whatever,” the captain replied. “Try this cigar, Professor
the Canadian said.
cetaceans. Which would be an affront to Captain Nemo, since he hates
pointless to argue about what tactics we should pursue in such a
it. Six of their eight tentacles were long, thin, and floated on the
“Yes, sir.”
“Right your helm! Engines forward!” Commander Farragut called.
a thousand questions I had no time to answer.
Those piles of stones just mentioned were laid out on the ocean floor
southernmost and northernmost seas. Old legends even claim that these
“Go to it, Ned,” Commander Farragut replied. “Engineer,” he called,
“On the fishing itself?” I asked. “Or on the occupational hazards
approaching struggle of the elements.
“My friends,” I said, “we’re in a serious predicament, but I’m
“I wasn’t saying a thing, captain.”
The storm burst during the daytime of May 13, just as the Nautilus was
“I’d hardly call this shore,” the Canadian replied. “And besides, we
“Ah, commander,” I exclaimed with conviction, “your Nautilus is truly
afternoon; it grew rockier and seemed to be strewn with pudding stones
gathered in this museum. For a museum it truly was, in which clever
break loose from the ropes that bound them to their ship. And the
churned the normally peaceful strata into actual billows.
its starting point, if you prefer, is located in the Bay of
of the Canadian, who remained to watch every detail of the
the central companionway.
of the ax hewed one more of its arms. His chief officer struggled
countercurrent of cold water that skirts the American coast. Here,
concerns you in one definite respect, because it will answer a
accepted the existence of such a monster sight unseen—specifically,
wings of petrels or puffins. By this point everything was frozen, even
“For my part, Conseil, that doesn’t bother me in the least, and I’ve
saw it as a perfectly natural thing to fall asleep under the waves and
electrocuting power equals that of the electric eel and the electric
say for himself. He’s a completely disinterested party on this
Extending over an expanse of 100 leagues north to south, and over 90
of Baffin Bay, and they’ll wipe out a whole class of useful
“Calm down, Ned,” I told the seething harpooner. “Anger won’t get us
skin, an order consisting of only one family. Examples: common eels
But this reply proved nothing, other than how bullheaded the harpooner
for this underwater machine, so long as the preposition in is
cannoneer fired a shot, but his shell passed some feet above the
called for dissecting this unknown monster; to dissect it called for
Raising his sextant, Captain Nemo took the altitude of the sun, which
departure.
I was unwilling to get into a pointless argument with the Canadian and
“Sir,” he answered, “you can trust me when I say this hunk of iron
so, I cherished no hopes that the man would set us free.
seagoing rivers was rolling by, the Kuroshio of the Japanese, the
gleeful Ned proposed that we return the next day to this magic island,
substances will be turned to stone by the action of the waters and
behind its eyes; a rare species whose very existence was still doubted
There Dillon collected many relics of the shipwreck: iron utensils,
Thus no other course would do but to name it for its hue.”
“Fine!” the Canadian put in. “But we already know what’s behind this
steam that resemble swirls of smoke. Herds of these different mammals
“This room isn’t only a library,” Captain Nemo said, “it’s also a
indicated that they dropped perpendicularly for more than 300 meters,
their breaking crests were proliferating over the surface of the
“It’s only a cluster of phosphorescent particles!” exclaimed one of
attached to the edges of the face at the front of the head; they
“And now, Ned, would you like to know my overall thinking on your
like mulberry trees, they reproduce by means of shoots and seeds.
alongside the Nautilus. Nobody appeared on our arrival. The enormous
views. However, the situation had changed in only a short time and we
“Conseil!” I muttered.
distinct is its current from the surrounding sea, its confined waters
crawling on their backs, seashells from the genus Auricula including
let the two valves snap shut.
lounge wall. The pressure gauge indicated that the Nautilus stayed at
half a dozen pineapples, and the fermented liquor from certain
quivered in the water like a nest of snakes?”
“It’s excellent,” I said, “but it’s not from the tobacco plant.”
obviously trying to locate some precise spot in the ocean. Just as on
begins to explain the dark power and otherworldly fascination of
of this invasion proved that the leak was considerable. Fortunately
had crossed only a small part.
signal, the Nautilus rose with lightning speed, shooting upward like
hadn’t seen Ned Land. No doubt, in the presence of the South Pole, the
we make a detour.”
for them, and I didn’t want to put off any longer our stroll through
in midwater, and farther down, cannons, shells, anchors, chains, and a
craft under the waters?
“Yes, my boy. Get my things ready, get yours ready. We’re departing in
The next day, June 1, the Nautilus kept to the same tack. It was
The hours passed. I often studied the instruments hanging on the
move about with such prodigious speed?
marvelous skills and showed just how much confidence we could place in
out of the Nautilus hadn’t taken place before then. Accordingly, three
thing. Our first attempt to escape must succeed, because if it
“You hear, Ned?” Conseil said.
like slim, supple snakes.
descended to the lowest strata of this sea.
incandescent liquid rose right to the mountain’s mouth, like cast iron
fixtures. Subdued lighting. No luxuries. Just the bare necessities.
pictures were glued to the tapestries, while those to port had their
stood his ground. His sailors couldn’t hide their discontent, and
heavy, the eyes bright and penetrating, and his whole personality
and forth, riding with the waves like a corpse. Its propeller had been
below sea level.”
I went below to the lounge, from which some chords were
view through the dissolving mists, first its beaches, then its
a gentle rolling told me that we were afloat in the open air.
some enormous jackfruit with a very tangy flavor, some tasty mangoes,
“Apparently,” the harpooner replied. “And yet for the three hours I’ve
I repaired to my stateroom. I couldn’t sleep. I was assaulted by
“Follow me,” I told my two companions.
is a sign of good luck. Aristotle, Athenaeus, Pliny, and Oppian
“What is it?” I asked, in a sitting position.
latitude; but night already fell for three or four hours, and later it
“Ah, Captain Nemo!” I replied. “Where are we?”
the island of Mauritius, they build fringing reefs, high, straight
devilfish intertwining their tentacles like bushes of writhing snakes.
which thickened above by as much as it diminished below. But this
we’re fairly well out from the Mannar oysterbank. But I have the skiff
them when we reach El Tur.”
whose value I estimated at 20,000 francs; a common hammer shell from
Part of the night passed without incident. We kept watch for an
the sight of that animal. His hands were ready to hurl a harpoon. You
“No, an incident,” he answered me.
Accordingly, I became aware of the isle of Karpathos, one of the
in the midst of the waters; porgies tinted orange, with slender
At six o’clock in the morning, January 8, I climbed onto the
left the lower strata and was back on the surface of the water.
mine on land. When I burn this combustible to produce sodium, the
whole solar spectrum, free-swimming crinoids one meter wide that
and despite the menu, Ned Land didn’t waste a bite. Then, lunch over,
After the galley came the crew’s quarters, 5 meters long. But the door
side, a second door then opened. We were lit by a subdued light. An
addressed me in the third person—to the point where it got tiresome.
surely have to stop, if only at the Ice Bank, and he’ll return to the
skiff. I went through the opening that had already given access to my
startling intensity. The wonderful Southern Cross, polar star of the
Near noon I was on the platform with Conseil. I shared with him the
“What master does, I’ll do,” Conseil replied.
those cockleshells so dear to the citizens of Marseilles, fat white
asked whether or not it suited him to go with me on my journeys; but
“To a certain depth. But at merely fifty meters, one encounters a firm
two companions.
“It has to be, Mr. Ned.”
Pontoppidan, the narratives of Paul Egede, and finally the reports of
north. But believe you me, I had my fill at the South Pole and I’m not
great is the power of its electric organ, an organ whose two chief
Captain Nemo delighted me with his incredible anecdotes.
floor?”
nightmares. That horrible scene of destruction kept repeating in my
best to stay in deep waters and keep his distance from continents or
there ever was one. Moreover, to renew our air supply, the submersible
a few days later it snapped again and couldn’t be recovered from the
shouted.
maneuver that the oceans allowed him, and his Nautilus felt cramped so
skiff started off in pursuit of the animal.
I still waited for a while, then I made my way to the main lounge. Its
we? What strange power was carrying us along? I felt—or at least I
I climbed onto it instantly, Ned Land and Conseil along with
I opened the door leading to the library. The same inadequate light,
He gave his orders. The Abraham Lincoln stayed at half steam,
rushed aboard. I asked for Commander Farragut. One of the sailors led
The Greek Islands
straight. Fucus plants and creepers were growing in stiff
agitation a sharp contrast to his superior.
between his shoulders, all attested to a fierce hate breathing from
zoophytes there were Portuguese men-of-war known by the name Physalia
there are whales that are 300 feet long and weigh 1,000,000 pounds.”
ship’s interior.
the Nautilus soon sank beneath the dark waves of these waterways.
and just as on the day before, the sun didn’t put in an appearance.
“Captain, I scorn them from this day forward.”
ocean. We could count several hundred of them. They belonged to that
On February 9 the Nautilus cruised in the widest part of the Red Sea,
In a few minutes we were a gunshot away from the coast. The soil was
difficult to measure its exact altitude above the horizon, and our
to be saved for the workmen. Not an atom for the Nautilus!
This news caused intense excitement. Not even a 24-hour breather was
down with all hands, with their crews and hosts of immigrants, at
longitude 167 degrees 50’ west, I found an islet that had been
beefwood, teakwood, hibiscus, screw pines, palm trees, all mingling in
“Secundo, the selacians, with gills resembling those of the
the general silence, a voice became audible. It was Ned Land’s voice,
scholars, one of those geniuses “embittered by the world,” as Conseil
utterly exhausted, faint from lack of food and rest, I repaired to my
“Yes, yes, Conseil! But instead of coiling from right to left, this
Just as I was about to repair to my stateroom, the captain stopped me.
over. Fortunately the glass cases were solidly secured at the base and
ratio to its emerging part.”
factor into account in his noon sights.
reappeared at the mouth of the Amazon River, a huge estuary whose
Mr. Ned Land?”
officers, we don’t total one-tenth of that figure.”
throatfuls of air, but I would have gotten by. Besides, when I saw
this way from these iron glove makers, the resulting receptacles
“That’s all fine and dandy. But in my humble opinion, a life in jail
on the tenth parallel, which we went along rigorously.
century, they were named the Malouines by fishermen from Saint-Malo in
wrench to unscrew the nuts bolting the skiff to the Nautilus’s
Captain Nemo suddenly fell silent in the midst of this enthusiastic
“Well, sir,” replied the Canadian, whose enthusiasm had subsided,
dreams—that my life had been reduced to the vegetating existence of a
out for their type of fishing. It’s sheltered from the strongest
is worth paying for. Besides, the longboat’s solidly built, and a few
natural enemies, such as sperm whales, swordfish, and sawfish, without
forces. And in some remote epoch, built up by volcanic disgorgings and
continents.”
depleted; and once it contains no more than 15% oxygen, it becomes
The Torres Strait is regarded as no less dangerous for its bristling
Senegal, fragile white bivalve shells that a single breath could pop
well as Captain Bureau, commander of the Darling Josephine out of
Conseil, he had come along out of simple curiosity.
whose summit Moses met God face to face, that summit the mind’s eye
up from the Mediterranean off the Barbary Coast or the shores of
I’ll inform you that it’s a mere 4,000 meters.”
before attacking; giant squid sport ten tentacles not eight; sperm
steam, it was traveling at a speed of thirteen knots. Without the high
heavy sphere inside which my head was rattling like an almond in its
trips, we make no great expenditure of either air or bullets.”
Yes, I did know that! I knew this man was daring to the point of being
Nautilus. What a sight! What pen could describe it? Who could portray
“Is glass capable of resisting such pressures?”
cunning were virtues he possessed to a high degree, and it took a
“Fine. It’s easily done. Only, when we see the fisheries, we’ll see no
“What about the frigate?” I asked.
“Complaining doesn’t have to do good, it just feels good! And if these
driven by an electric motor that needed no coal, could face such high
furnaces. Ventilators shot torrents of air over the braziers. The
collections and art exhibitions. The various schools of the old
The Scotia hadn’t run afoul of something, it had been fouled, and by a
the stalks of water plants. They adorned the smallest crevices, some
microscopic crustaceans, and sea-pen coral lit it faintly with their
even if you didn’t get any food for your before-meal blessing—and
precautions.”
“At your command?”
already stretched out in this clear crystal, setting us a fine naptime
after the Search was placed at his disposal, and he departed on
giant clams given to King François I by the Republic of Venice, and
“Professor, you know as well as I do that a man can live underwater so
THIS CELL, properly speaking, was the Nautilus’s arsenal and
I wanted to see the lounge one last time. I went down the gangways and
The platform emerged only eighty centimeters above the waves. The
door. Not a sound. I left my stateroom and returned to the lounge,
railing, he was thrown backward in his turn.
some sleep-inducing substance had been laced into the food we’d just
complaints. I’m ready to do anything I can for the common good.”
not avoid.
intensity of thunderclaps. But just then the Nautilus’s slanting fins
here? Nothing. He isn’t a scientist like master, and he doesn’t share
In the midst of this moving vegetation, under arbors of water plants,
had scaled the peak, which crowned the whole rocky mass by some ten
thunderstorms. One day, carried off by a hurricane from neighboring
above the level of the ocean. This height had tripled since the moment
“You’ll see, sir, how tasty this bread is!”
the other for the brilliance of the powerful electric beacon lighting
“When I’ve mixed this honey with our breadfruit batter,” he told us,
snap in two, and twenty-four-pounder cannons relocate. And yet in the
down and the disemboweled hive yielded several pounds of sweet
rorqual whales that frequent the waterways of the Aleutian Islands,
all these books were shelved indiscriminately without regard to the
“Well, Ned, you want me to ask Captain Nemo what he intends to do with
The next day, March 20, it stopped snowing. The cold was a little more
Deville, Chasles, Milne-Edwards, Quatrefages, John Tyndall, Faraday,
informed.
“Then I would ask what you mean by this freedom.”
females into mermaids.
of the ship victimized by this new ramming, and thanks to the
paragons; they form in isolation within the mollusk’s tissue. They’re
yellowish brown, the swiftest of all cetaceans. This powerful animal
farmed annually for a total profit of 3,000,000 man-eaters.”
bearings were taken, and the Moravian continued on course apparently
What bloodshed! What a hubbub on the surface of the waves! What sharp
churned the waves with indescribable violence.
where the breaking surf is covered by the noise of the wind! How many
white plains covered with walruses. These animals were playing among
before us: a town now in ruins, whose walls would collapse at the mere
have authorized.
burst the hardest stones? Aren’t you aware that this force could be
small wood, enlivened by the singing and soaring of a large number of
strong and full of energy, and they eat what I eat.”
The captain looked me straight in the eye.
As for Ned Land, I admit I felt less confident of his wisdom. Danger,
“In master’s little apartment,” Conseil answered. “In master’s museum!
already crossed.
“Yes! It will be a really unusual experience!”
become extremely rare, and it takes refuge chiefly in the northernmost
flesh-colored background, fanciful spider conchs that looked like
Noon arrived without the orb of day appearing for a single
These orders were executed, and the frigate swiftly retreated from
attack.
The sea was magnificent, the skies clear. This long aquatic vehicle
salty aroma. It had to be a sea breeze, life-giving and charged with
“And in his forests on Crespo Island!” Conseil added.
which will save us a pretty long trek. It’s carrying our diving
Captain Nemo was obviously familiar with this bivalve’s
twenty-four hours the oxygen contained in 2,400 liters. Therefore, we
aside. He told himself no. At last these words escaped his lips:
“Even so,” I replied, “to fire underwater in a medium that’s 855 times
day before were now open. I arrived on the platform.
cabin located next to the sailors’ quarters.
for myself, I’ll do justice to them both.”
that could cause a break. The Nautilus followed it to its lowest
to us stashing a cargo of coconuts aboard his vessel?”
couldn’t stand still. I walked up and down, hoping to calm my troubled
many thoughts had piled up in my mind, too many insoluble questions
I could hear their beaks gnashing on the sheet-iron hull. We couldn’t
his sack, pulled up his stone, and started all over again, the whole
hull disappeared little by little, but when night fell in the midst of
the history of Spain?”
I’ll no longer be safe next to you, I who share your cabin! Does this
atmospheres.
I’m not sure that Conseil heeded my recommendation, because he seemed
“Oh ye gods, I’m half tempted to believe it! But back to you,
Antilles, the ocean’s geologic profile features a steeply cut cliff
there were too many seals ashore, and it would never do to expose this
I related to him what the final deeds of Captain Dumont d’Urville had
figure they’ll keep us in this iron box?”
the Hope, which left Brest on September 28 under orders from Rear
hope of fixing our position.
By December 15 we had left the alluring Society Islands in the west,
instance I don’t think a little hesitation on my part would be out of
multiple soundings have given the contours of the terrain with the
saw only my emotionless steward, who served me with his usual mute
“Well then, I think—and I don’t mean ‘I hope’—that your promising
Indian Ocean, when he imprisoned us in the cell, hadn’t he attacked
be the last, because a second time I won’t even listen.”
will then form inexhaustible coalfields. Valuable reserves prepared by
master, they don’t strike me as very wicked!”
What a predicament! We were rocking frightfully. The Nautilus defended
have only asphyxiation to fear.”
another wall just as imposing; together these two barricades confine
the gear needed to fish for a gigantic cetacean. No whaling vessel
impending danger, he clutched his pig on one side, his kangaroos on
word “assai,” and from their gestures I understood they were inviting
producing pearls include rainbow abalone, turbo snails, giant clams,
frenzy of destruction, slaughtered all the adults, including pregnant
invisible door must have been hermetically sealed. Not a sound reached
which I hadn’t noticed during my first visit. They were portraits of
“Here,” I replied, “are a few of them that stick in my memory. If I’m
At Full Steam
few words in their incomprehensible language and withdrew, not even
“What about our weapons?” I asked him. “Our rifles?”
“Yes, professor, and there was no shortage of such sources. In fact,
of those insoluble problems that kept welling up in my mind!
some light on the subject, you’ll be satisfied.”
“All this vegetation doesn’t make a meal,” Ned replied. “Just side
efficiency.
STEPPING ASHORE had an exhilarating effect on me. Ned Land tested the
The first words I pronounced were words of appreciation and gratitude
La Pérouse, ships whose disappearance had shaken the entire world. He
Captain Nemo hated to hug shore. There our nets brought up some fine
At five o’clock in the afternoon, just before that brief twilight that
including its accommodations, and 4,000,000 or 5,000,000 with all the
A Whale of Unknown Species
for an instant. His pupils were hideously contracted. His voice was no
air for nine or ten hours.”
Conseil made one final effort, and bracing his hands on my shoulders,
Crete, also called Candia. At the time I had shipped aboard the
navigated the narrows of the Strait of Magellan.”
the compartment where Captain Nemo, indisputably a world-class
All at once, carried away by its frightful excess load, the Nautilus
the genus Lepisocanthus with bristling jaws and sharp scales, flying
of Mr. Land who couldn’t complete his provisions. The adroit Canadian
colored, bristling with thorns, a specimen rare to European museums,
revulsion, I forced it down, wanting to keep my strength up.
rays whose warmth was unevenly distributed. Now then, I use glass
tail on Bouguer’s Squid has surely had time to sprout again.”
Now, for all the reasons put forward to this point, I believed that
with stippled tails, butterfly rays that looked like huge two-meter
I’ve collected every one of them with my own two hands, and not a sea
slowed down significantly.
Land think about all this?”
I bent over him. Not only was he sick, he was wounded. Swathed in
herring fifteen inches long were wrapped in their phosphorescent
intensity of these underground forces continues to diminish. Volcanoes
edible fish that, when dried and marinated, make an excellent dish
ideas. “Can’t you tell me how many men are on board? Ten, twenty,
Peter Dillon, who was the first to pick up the trail left by castaways
I hesitated to interrupt him. But some moments later, when he turned
Dolabella, plump paper-bubble shells, umbrella shells exclusive to the
dramatized it in the theaters. The tabloids found it a fine
The ghost of a smile glided across the captain’s lips, and that was
platform. He was lashed around the waist to withstand the monstrous
“Very much.”
surface areas make up millions of square centimeters, and the pressure
isthmus.”
to tell me:
“Propose away, captain.”
going up the coast of Portugal. France and England aren’t far off, and
crouching. His body leaning slightly back, Ned Land brandished his
Captain Nemo’s quarters. I couldn’t pass up this chance for an
clouds covered the moon’s disk, then in its first quarter. The sea
recall my every impression of it. A single detail comes back to
depths?”
reports from ancient times: the views of Aristotle and Pliny accepting
“Tonight. There doesn’t seem to be any supervision left on the
Clear for an instant, plus the lighthouse on Fastnet Rock that guides
grass. The rocky mass was gouged with impenetrable crevices, deep
When the Nautilus returned to the surface of the ocean, I could take
floating, would indicate the dugong’s movements beneath the waters.
perfect steadiness. It was then drawing 6.7 meters of water and
that supported the vault. Then I saw that bees weren’t the animal
Well, Conseil my friend, on behalf of the rays, I wouldn’t advise you
Davis Strait, and resumes its ocean course by going along a great
It was good advice and we took it. After an hour’s walk we reached a
these open-sea fowl.
the time I spotted a hazy glow half a mile away, cutting through the
“Yes, precisely.”
“A smoking room?” I exclaimed. “Then one may smoke on board?”
path that ran over the cliff’s summit. By 11:30 we had arrived at our
below the surface of the waves.
anemones with a grayish trunk and a brown disk lost beneath the
by weight. Finally, classed in the lowest order, the smallest pearls
As for me, I stared industriously in the direction under observation
“Sir,” I replied, flaring up in spite of myself, “you’re taking unfair
come about, then, that in the process of producing your sodium, you’d
“Innocent boy!” I exclaimed. “Cod are flat only at the grocery store,
alive. Besides, I’m not a Negro, and even if I were a Negro, in this
deeper still. It reached a depth of 800 meters. At the surface this
volcano didn’t rise more than 1,800 feet above the level of the ocean.
“Does anybody fish for ’em nowadays?” the Canadian asked.
cotton-colored wake that whitened the ocean as far as the eye could
phosphorescent glimmers. I glimpsed piles of stones covered by a
You can appreciate that under these conditions, our situation had
“Oh drat!” said the old gunner in his anger. “That rascal must be
Well, no. The blackish back supporting me was smooth and polished with
amphipods, homopods, isopods, trilobites, branchiopods, ostracods, and
lions whose ears protrude—I observed several varieties of the species
down. With two vigorous kicks of the heel, I came back to the surface
“Go ahead, then!” Commander Farragut called.
his arms:
“All the more reason you should go look him up.”
unless they force me!”
some ten miles farther south amid the half light left by the sun as it
and the collapse of these masses created daunting eddies down to the
the earth. While you were sleeping, professor, the Nautilus entered
fellow countryman. Such a man brings a nation more honor than the
without counting man. These specimens will soon have to deal with
“If they don’t fish for them, sailors at least sight them. A friend of
Units of Measure
Ned Land was unwilling to leave his provisions behind, and despite the
I was left to myself. His request granted, I decided to dispose of it
outburst of voices tell me that Ned Land’s escape plans had just been
conversation.
in an immense, highly elongated oval, condensing at the center into a
How many delightful hours I spent in this way at the lounge window!
rivers. In the center stood an upright wheel geared to rudder cables
not mistaken, an average depth of 8,200 meters was found in the north
with spines, lamp shells, edible duck clams that feed the Hindu
learn. Have a seat,” he added, “and I’ll tell you about an unusual
Much to his amazement, the harpooner seemed no more intelligible than
do.”
dropped anchor inside its barrier in the harbor of Vana.
distance of at least 500 kilometers during this ill-fated day of
features the Cephalopoda (whose members are sometimes naked, sometimes
soaked! By water in the midst of water! I couldn’t help smiling at
device, it didn’t seem to be in the picture. Before inserting my head
these gentlemen will grasp a few words of it!”
from right to left. Man uses his right hand more often than his left,
“The water’s coming up to us!”
time. Where? Nobody knew.
Matapan, nicknamed ‘Il Pesce.’* He’s well known throughout the
procedures that, on the Nautilus, you could call “clearing the decks
I looked back down the side we had just cleared. There the mountain
upper Norway and the south is limited. So I have to wait for the
the Nautilus had risen about 150 feet, but it still stayed at the same
crushed them with its weight, or at other times, when cooped up
Christian era, a new island, the divine Thera, had already appeared in
the spring they delight in swimming up the great rivers, fighting the
summits I recognized the next day. The sea was of moderate depth. So
“I’ve no idea, but whatever it is, there we’ll take refuge.”
sometimes leave between each other.
“Sir,” I exclaimed, “are you going to attack this ship?”
relieved by a few ancient ruins. On February 5 we finally put into the
value, the likes of which I had marveled at in private European
some days as the case may be. Since I prefer never to use violence, I
this Antarctic polar basin now served as a refuge for those cetaceans
farther, he’ll stop.”
The Abraham Lincoln had been perfectly chosen and fitted out for its
But even so, was the man going to let us die of starvation, locked up
reared like a nobleman’s above the arc formed by the lines of his
“No,” I replied, “because an aquarium is nothing more than a cage, and
existence. This wasn’t the first time he’d paid it a visit, and I
closely.
harpooner Ned Land, a creature of constant appetites, man as heroic
which I encountered several times, was the enormous crab that
breakfast without formality. We can chat while we eat. Because,
Under this powerful thrust the Nautilus’s hull quivered like a
itself gives their full description, several varieties of porgy or
vengeance against his imperialist oppressor.
that the pressure of one atmosphere is represented by the pressure of
And Conseil hurled another desperate plea into space.
Old. That a private individual had such a mechanism at his disposal
“Yes, my boy,” I replied, “it cuts across the whole Strait of Sicily,
“A shell isn’t worth a human life!” I told him.
in broad daylight I doubt that he would have noticed me, so completely
sea. Elsewhere, they take the shape of barrier reefs, such as those
“Yikes! Who in Hades ever believed in them?” the Canadian exclaimed.
Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas.
“Often, sir, but never a whale like this, whose sighting earned me
running to the Nautilus’s stern. Set in the cabin’s walls were four
great irony. So I’ve just one thing to say to you: have faith in him
of birds in the air and myriads of fish under the waters, which varied
fire devouring it.
yardarms. The gaff of its fore-and-aft sail flew no flag. Its distance
could reach no deeper. So at precisely this point the darkness became
without feathers, or two feet with feathers, will be greeted by my
Now then, on May 25 while submerged to a depth of 3,836 meters, the
“Professor,” Captain Nemo went on, “if you’re amenable, we’ll go back
women, their soft, limpid eyes, their charming poses, led the ancients
was wrenched from its socket and launched to sea from the top of the
equal in size, has the shape of a round shell with thick walls and a
tuft of mangrove, in memory of the famous navigator and his
just a few hours before rejoining his regiment at Hadjaroth, the very
“Yes, we are . . . certainly . . . ,” I replied evasively, “but after
“Surely. An excellent longboat, light and unsinkable, which is used
Finally, how do you keep your ship at whatever level suits you? Am I
articulates, he needed to mention the class Cirripedia, which contains
face them in a mere skiff. No doubt Ned Land understood this because
against these sacred saurians.
surging. Its waves made the Nautilus roll and jerk violently. It was
the warnings given by their bosun’s pipes and alarm bells!
be quite astonished if that good-natured satellite doesn’t
“So be it. I’ll see him today,” I answered the Canadian, who, if he
vanished from my memory. I saw this mystifying individual anew for
beaches.
beneath it.
earth yet preserving all its beauty from those far-off
hours passed, as I sometimes envisioned myself safe on shore with my
that covered some prehistoric animals, and I might have left it at
sweeping him to the pole. I was leading the way, I was out in front
kingdom. But as one intellectual has remarked, “Here, perhaps, is the
Nautilus’s entering it. It adopted a medium pace, sometimes staying on
ten days they’ve rotted sufficiently. Next they’re immersed in huge
more. We had staked our salvation on this one last gamble.
and well designed for speed, keeping their balance by means of two
on the platform. The propeller was set in motion. The Nautilus swiftly
previous afternoon’s events. He did nothing of the sort. I stared at
Ned Land observed the sea with his penetrating eyes. It was
A universal shout went up from the frigate.
“Especially since we’ve gone without baked goods for so long,” Conseil
“Aye, sir,” the engineer replied.
and here the sun is due north.”
“As master wishes.”
revealed a certain uneasiness. He studied the compass and pressure
accept the existence of any such monster till I’ve dissected it with
“But in that case what do you expect?” the Canadian asked.
1,500 cubic meters of water, or weighs 1,500 metric tons.
the bowels of the ship, from the quarters of the bunker hands to the
only his quest for freedom, but also, perhaps, it was used in
of their crystals. The former, tinted with a bright limestone sheen,
places again on the organ keys, “if every islander in Papua were to
One day Solon was conversing with some elderly wise men in the
frustrate scientists. All walls should be banned.”
“In the water?”
Scotia could brave any leak with impunity.
underwater prison, it strikes me as completely unworkable.”
navies. While the longboat coasted, drops of liquid flicked from the
decide which of these deeds was more beneficial to humanity. Coming
seafloor: various isis coral, cornularian coral living in isolation,
On April 13, 1867, with a smooth sea and a moderate breeze, the Scotia
Asia and America. In this way he would complete his underwater tour of
steamer’s hull.
our equipment, which meant leaving the thin, foul air behind.
For a few moments more I observed the dying man, whose life was ebbing
the results of this experiment. The panels in the lounge opened, and
facilitated the victory of Augustus Caesar. From such slender threads
“Good thinking, Professor Aronnax,” the captain replied with a
“Eh? What happened to master?” Conseil asked, very startled. “Did
lava flow, which contains in itself the principle of its
“Well, helmsman?” Commander Farragut asked.
changing speed to take the buoy-marked channel that curved into the
“And why is that, sir? Some promising opportunity might come up, and I
Professor at the Paris Museum of Natural History, I had been attached
“Well, sir, can’t we manage without his permission?”
seemingly covered with scales.
For several hours I was left to myself, sometimes musing on the
French scientist Jean Bailly to write so many entertaining—albeit
by the captain. Its propeller churned the waves with lazy
that seemed to close off every exit. Its summit obviously poked above
deadened the sound of footsteps. Its naked walls didn’t reveal any
a depth of 300 meters. But in this fluid setting traveled by the
for good; he works to save lives, both human and animal, yet he
unpredictably. Often we went around tall, pointed rocks rising like
distasteful to me.
the young trees. In this way animal life developed, and drawn by the
hour. But I didn’t see a thing, not even Perim Island where the
everybody knows: “Now,” Maury says, “if bits of cork or chaff, or any
take us! These beasts can be quite unpredictable! But we’re going just
beyond the Pillars of Hercules, home of those powerful Atlantean
write.
nonexistent.
instruments—in other words, a chronometer, a spyglass, and a
life and death?”
visibly returning to their normal positions. The walls were
since March 13 on Antarctic shores corresponds with September 13 in
spot crossed by every meridian on the globe. As you know, I do
961.52 metric tons, which when added to 394.96 metric tons, gives us
nature. I would only ask you about the uses intended for these
eccentric individual pronounced these last words—the name Avenger
Nautilus had gone aground, then heeled over sharply.
no army or navy. Yet it wasn’t short of money, provided that its
fused to form one single, selfsame island.”
meters from the Nautilus’s hull.
miles. In these Antarctic districts, as is well known, Sir James Clark
finest originals, stood on their pedestals in the corners of this
American and European newspaper without being any farther along. This
fearsome arms of a devilfish, ground between its iron mandibles, this
dining room of the Hotel Adelphi in Liverpool, or the Grand Hotel in
head are white speckled with black.
the outskirts of the pole!
little effort is spent in reaching the ocean’s lower regions, because
That evening Captain Nemo was forced to open the spigots of his air
required that we be permanently imprisoned on board the Nautilus?
officer determined his position. I also caught only a glimpse of
journeys; a gallant Flemish boy whom I genuinely liked and who
Conseil. That fine lad persisted in seeing the Nautilus’s commander as
“It’s the beginning of the end!” Ned Land said.
After the works of art, natural rarities predominated. They consisted
Nautilus with consummate dexterity, he skillfully dodged the masses of
make for the Atlantic or the Pacific, in other words, whether we’ll
What lightning flashed through my mind! Atlantis, that ancient land of
decisively held in check. No longer was it an ice stream, patch, or
cited a saying by the botanist Linnaeus that “nature doesn’t make
revolving storms in the southern hemisphere.
beneath sudden waves that smash down with a headlong wallop.
“In person, sir, and still after his prize!” the Canadian replied.
I estimate that this cast of the net brought in more than 1,000 pounds
acute, I wondered whether it wouldn’t be better to enter the captain’s
no knowledge of them.”
biography of this patriotic ship, then the excitement with which this
against the lounge window. Then smaller fish appeared: miscellaneous
cold from the sea arrived boiling hot at the body of the pump.
lounge was plunged in profound darkness. Chords from the organ were
truth. But the fact remains that not a single dogfish let itself get
Parthenon; there, the remnants of a wharf, as if some bygone port had
Canadian Homer reciting his Iliad of the High Arctic regions.
yet. What a shame! I liked him better eccentric than insane!”
these unfortunate people!”
eyewitness to his vengeance! Even this was intolerable.
and into these Atlantic waters; but the panels were hermetically
with water, and the submersible sank some ten meters down.
or dolphins, and armed with a tusk made of horn that has tremendous
“Breaking out of a prison on shore is difficult enough, but with an
detaching about 6,500 cubic meters, to dig a hole through which the
them at close quarters.”
“Bah!” replied the rancorous harpooner. “What the devil do you suppose
those properly termed seals—which have no external ears, unlike sea
its reverse a letter encircled by a Latin motto, and here is its exact
didn’t stop examining the long plains of Atlantis. Sometimes an
for itself.”
repaired the joint and its splice; then the cable was resubmerged. But
“But if these Papuans are occupying the platform at that moment, I
Since conditions inside were universally unbearable, how eagerly, how
But Conseil had one flaw. He was a fanatic on formality, and he only
man was certainly the most wonderful physical specimen I had ever
observed slender threads of bluish water streaking through these ice
Pyrenees in the dust, so he inflicted his grandson, the Duke of Anjou,
Latin. Cicero would have plugged his ears and sent me to the scullery,
Suddenly a hissing sound was audible, and the dugong
driven to take refuge in this inaccessible environment where he was
doubt he alerted his men to keep on their guard.
long.
idea of putting one on.
vegetables in the world. Because, just as 40,000 near-invisible buds
I likewise marveled at the numerous medusas, including the most
greatest freedom. But if we returned to the Pacific, far from every
“The same,” I replied. “Commander Farragut?”
lyrefish and seamen pipers and whose snouts have two jagged triangular
This forest was made up of big treelike plants, and when we entered
Suez. Through the panels in the lounge, I spotted rocky bottoms
the books to be read in the library, and the composition of my
crossing of the Israelites, when the Pharaoh perished in those waves
plied more heavily traveled seas, we often saw wrecked hulls rotting
fairly great depths. Among the latter I observed a species of dogfish
time. “I ask you! We speak French, English, German, and Latin to these
from us, and its beach merged with the misty waters. Between us and
it. Better to be prisoners aboard the Nautilus than to fall into the
stretched the dangerous waterways of the Coral Sea, off the northeast
double-valved shell. . . .
Assuredly, the Nautilus didn’t avoid the heavily traveled seas of
“Yes! Fish!” Conseil exclaimed. “One would think he was in front of an
mistake. There’s definitely a whale lurking in our waters. With your
pirates—I say pirates out of consideration for the professor’s
But after all, as Conseil noted, we enjoyed complete freedom, we were
by a high rate of evaporation, its water level dropping a meter and a
Land. But my two friends had already encased their craniums in their
all extremely disturbed by the business.
scrap of it.
Apteronotus whose snow-white snout is very blunt, the body painted a
occurred that reminded him of his happy years as a harpooner.
beneath the waves.
On April 16 we raised Martinique and Guadalupe from a distance of
laid out, and I couldn’t believe my eyes.
up to 120 revolutions per minute.”
without noticing us, grazing us with their brownish fins; and
star-shaped, white-streaked flowers. Only, contrary to plants on
we’ve become old friends, united in that permanent comradeship born
poisoned the air, and this poisoned air causes the yellow fever that
of papers, yellowed but still legible.
eruptions of a geyser, the Governor Higginson had fair and honest
government went fishing on its own behalf, its divers worked just
which was deserted and plunged in near darkness.
Dendrophylia, known in Provence by the name sea fennel, and a poultice
nothing more than a silver substance that collects in the water and is
imprisoned in defiance of his civil rights, asked by virtue of which
jellyfish that Cuvier described, whose bluish parasols are trimmed
“Therefore,” he said to me, “to build these walls, it took . . . ?”
It was one o’clock in the morning. We arrived at the mountain’s lower
“We’re going astern?” Conseil said.
Then the funeral party went back up the path to the Nautilus,
shrug of the shoulders.
dimensions, easily exceeding seven meters in length. It didn’t stir
with mud, which make distinct hissing sounds; sea robins whose livers
circumstances dictated.
a refuge for an extremely large number of migratory fish that flee
And on this subject a dispute arose between the two friends, since
it seemed to be made of gold leaf. I lit it at a small brazier
and with mixing tropical and northern waters, the Gulf Stream begins
opened into the galley, 3 meters long and located between the vessel’s
amounts of power!”
this animal was a member of the branch Vertebrata, class Mammalia,
The next day, January 5, after its deck paneling was opened, the skiff
into six orders. Primo, the acanthopterygians, whose upper jaw is
limited. A few lichens of the species Usnea melanoxanthra sprawled
them. Deep down they’re just poor devils, these Papuans, and I don’t
calculations can give only a very uncertain figure.”
obvious, much to my satisfaction, that we were returning north by the
measuring 190 miles straight across from Suakin on the west coast to
For two more hours Ned Land’s rage increased. The Canadian shouted and
“I’m all attention.”
Olaus Magnus tells of a cephalopod a mile long that looked more like
people not quite in their right minds, was completely eliminated. And
- MILLIMETER Roughly 1/25 of an inch
over this sea were torn loose from the prairies of that ancient
winged kelp, whose long thin tendrils stood up like arrows.
orders in that strange language I couldn’t even identify. Then,
“No, sir, it’s apparently a gigantic narwhale, and an electric one to
ocean’s lower strata. The Nautilus then rolled and pitched like a ship
Finally, to conclude, Conseil classified a large number of flying
typical persistence.
“No more than I could exit through it. You can climb about 100 feet up
bananas. This delicious produce from the Torrid Zones ripens all year
me of insanity or self-contradiction.”
this bizarre element!” as one witty naturalist puts it. “The animal
nautical leagues.
without bothering to cook them. In addition to bananas, we gathered
on opposite tacks in that part of the Atlantic lying between the
nearly impossible to stand up on the platform, which was continuously
which only a few specimens are left in the Red Sea. That’s a dugong.”
width must reach 4,000 kilometers.
Ned Land was determined, Conseil calm, I myself nervous and barely in
landing place. The beached skiff had brought the captain ashore. I
glisten like a pigeon’s throat.
“Then unless you fill up the whole Nautilus, I don’t see how you can
Twice I went to the lounge. I wanted to consult the compass. I wanted
freeze is gaining fast.”
bound us to him. In order to keep us captive, he had counted only on
meters, and the speed of their propagation (half that of the wind) was
the engine, the ballast, the various accessories and accommodations,
Ned and Conseil had no time for such musings. They were wolfing down
feel the anger building in him. Whenever he encountered the captain,
that supposedly contained at least 150 sharks.”
caught in the Nautilus’s nets, so I can’t vouch for their voracity.
fucus plants been gathered that were over 500 meters long!
one is unaware of the existence of that great warm-water current known
startled by how emphatically Captain Nemo had just spoken.
I consulted the world map; and in latitude 32 degrees 40’ north and
But this hypothesis of a war machine collapsed in the face of formal
Conseil kept Ned under observation. The harpooner walked in the lead,
crew to run a ship like this one.”
profusion. Soft to the foot, these densely textured lawns would have
the Nautilus was floating in the middle of a sea of blood.
“Why easy, captain?”
doubt the cetacean itself had “warmed up,” because without the least
I was readily compensated for this delay by fascinating
is extremely dainty and whose phosphorescent properties give them away
“What!” Ned Land exclaimed. “Rays and man-eaters in the same order?
wafting. Captain Nemo was there, leaning over the organ, deep in a
Just then Commander Farragut was giving orders to cast off the last
6. At Full Steam
again without at least sounding him out on his future plans. As soon
background of the horizon.
“Yes, sir.”
day were enough to obliterate this Atlantis, whose highest peaks
the weapon collide resonantly, as if it had hit some hard substance.
below the surface of the waves.
its elevation by means of his barometer, since he had to take this
whole centuries and had the strength to raise blocks of stone that
Finally Captain Nemo regained his self-control. His facial appearance,
assailants a network of electricity no one could clear with impunity.
This sudden illumination of our cabin enabled me to examine its
journey. Never did he object to buckling up his suitcase for any
brave, because just a few meters beneath the waves, it finds absolute
firm but less regular than usual. Sometimes he would stop, cross his
Suddenly Conseil’s voice startled me awake.
Through the lounge’s open windows, I saw large, frightened fish
I climbed as far as the hatch. It was open. But instead of the broad
interest in keeping that secret, and if their personal interest is
a yellow beak, brown feet and claws, hazel wings with purple tips,
iron, its lid bearing a copper plaque that displayed the Nautilus’s
“Damnation!” exclaimed the furious Canadian. “I missed it!”
“If master faces these sharks,” Conseil said, “I think his loyal
After cruising along the Cartier, Hibernia, Seringapatam, and Scott
were now worth centuries.
My clothes were weighing me down. The water glued them to my body,
“Why, I to whom you speak,” Conseil said with the world’s straightest
social upheavals of this century? Was he a hero of that dreadful civil
enhanced by some valuable exhibits from the delphinula snail species,
four genera. Example: the sturgeon.”
“Yes, all hail to that great French citizen,” I replied, quite
because it’s likely that by hunting whales in the Arctic or Antarctic
voyage continue?”
carefully, trying to find out the nature of this gigantic
As for zoophytes, for a few moments I was able to marvel at a
to provoke him to some involuntary show of interest had he understood
coast or spiriting us farther away. But no. The Nautilus was still in
“On foot?”
“What an awful animal!” he exclaimed.
hissing, and an animal dropped a few paces away, literally struck by
was reckoning without events.
times they were borne in triumph to the table of the Roman epicure
seaman in him was talking now.
“What amazes me is thinking we’ll be there the day after tomorrow.”
ventured to comment on it to my companions.
little by little, backing up, then putting on full speed against the
“And just for one day, would it displease you to return to your
recognized some Irishmen, some Frenchmen, a few Slavs, and a native of
sway of a ghastly homesickness, Ned would kill himself. So he kept a
again—because my tank’s current air supply seemed to be quite low in
This speed was maintained for several days, and on the evening of
The narrow hatch had barely closed over me when I was surrounded by
enabling you to risk these new physiological conditions without
“Hold on tight.”
tool known as a burin. Furthermore, this native boatman claimed that
successfully be attacked, and Ned Land had harpooned more than one in
incomplete! How could I relinquish this ocean—“my own Atlantic,” as I
Before Conseil could finish his sentence, Ned Land scooted down the
But it was in the air that life was superabundant. There various
waters ten meters below the surface of the waves, I found so many
fleets had retreated.
“Sample some, Ned my friend, sample all you like. We’re here to
On February 10, 1828, the new Astrolabe hove before Tikopia Island,
chancy business.
of fish. It was a fine catch but not surprising. In essence, these
“Which would all go out the window!” Ned Land replied. “Don’t you see,
the softcover editions of the First and Second Parts issued separately
protuberances. A few frightened sperm whales were fleeing toward the
“So let’s continue our excursion,” I went on, “but keep a sharp
& Colonial Review, all the rags devoted to insurance companies—who
I continued sketching. These monsters kept pace in our waters with
tantamount to saying that when it’s completely submerged, it displaces
delightful to the eye. The finest pearls are called virgin pearls, or
N
submerged region that had existed outside Europe, Asia, and Libya,
it remained motionless, listing slightly to port.
heels the various national governments on these two continents, were
eddies, how Ned Land, Conseil, and I got out of that whirlpool, I’m
exclusive setting where ships rarely go. Above us, huddled among the
brine; its coldness ran through me; I raised my head one last time,
“Yes and no, Professor Aronnax,” answered Captain Nemo, who seemed to
simple festering secretion from the organ that produces
as I was. In short, although I’m not easily discouraged, I realized
The mollusk’s two valves were partly open. The captain approached and
CHAPTER 20
“You may go, Professor Aronnax,” Captain Nemo told me.
maintaining in essence that “nature doesn’t make lunatics,” and
landslides and over stones slippery with ice. More than once I took a
death by asphyxiation. I don’t mention the possibility of death by
the future have in store for us?
passageway. For an instant I could glimpse the wonderful ruins of the
It happened the morning of January 15. The captain, with whom I was
deliberately—and I had no idea what our position was. In any case this
ALTHOUGH I WAS startled by this unexpected descent, I at least have a
blindfolded—”
actual forearms. In the water, their ideal element, I must say these
“In drawing up plans for a ship meant to navigate underwater, I wanted
albacore, a species in the genus Scomber, as big as tuna, bluish on
1865 fan letter from a fellow writer, Madame George Sand. She praised
few feet from this cross, detached a mattock from his belt and began
lounge.
panes of glass. Initially I shuddered at the thought that these
from hanging out too long in the same waterways! It’s blessed with a
geographer Strabo adds that it’s especially rough during the rainy
a ringing in my ear, from this organ filling with impeded blood, but
huge boneyard forms from fish, mollusks, and zoophytes dying over it
sea, or that they meant: “There’s nothing in sight.”
ribbons and orders are held in such low esteem.
“Unintentionally?” the stranger replied, raising his voice a
no man has ever ventured before! Look, captain! Look at these
American fisheries used to make an annual profit of 4,000,000 francs
Pacific. Commander Farragut felt, and with good reason, that it was
CHAPTER 6
Abraham Lincoln. A deserted immenseness.
while I swam for us both.
Meanwhile I examined the Nautilus’s engine with a fascination easy to
his companions when they went with him on his underwater excursions.
“Well, professor,” Captain Nemo replied, “we’ll show you better than
by like pieces of bunting borne on the breeze, in the midst of kalao
Half an hour had already gone by without our situation changing, when
Under these conditions the barometer generally stayed quite low. It
stood on the existence of this so-called monster. Undoubtedly the
huge teeth that are twenty centimeters high, have cylindrical, conical
boat sinks, and it’s exactly flush with the surface of the water.”
spurred-star shells, wentletrap snails, horn shells, glass snails. The
long filaments other than the chief articulates of the division
Strait.”
stars spangling the sand.
family . . . but here I couldn’t make up my mind. The order Cetacea
with cutlets, I won’t be happy!”
mystery of his existence? Was he a fighter for oppressed peoples, a
Crossing through the lounge, I arrived at the door, contrived in one
And above all, what must he have thought when Captain Nemo pulled a
tinted with fine shades of ultramarine; then, off in the distance, it
“Perhaps,” Conseil replied serenely. “However, we still have a few
still not enough to cope with our gigantic cetacean.
“May I learn, sir,” I asked him, “what caused this accident?”
having a name that means “counsel,” never giving advice—not even the
“When you’re at a depth of 1,000 meters, the Nautilus’s plating bears
reptiles, because they wake up at the slightest sound, and their solid
have brought you into the presence of a man who has cut himself off
tells it.
ventilation was finally established.
“But couldn’t someone enter through the mouth of its crater?”
secreted by cuttlefish or squid. Everything comes to me from the sea,
was never mistaken—who sighted a baleen whale on the eastern
8. “Mobilis in Mobili”
Captain Nemo walked in front, and his companion followed us a few
FIRST PART
The Torres Strait is about thirty-four leagues wide, but it’s
horizon, and the cyclone left the east to return there after passing
Dumont d’Urville had come to avenge the Count de La Pérouse and his
“I warn you, this will be an exhausting stroll. We’ll need to walk
the accident that happened to the Scotia?”
it helps to be familiar with it.”
man. The Nautilus is nearing Long Island. We’ll escape, no matter what
collect myself. I did so. The lounge was dark, but the sea’s waves
FOR SOME WHILE the voyage of the Abraham Lincoln was marked by no
and my footprints faded swiftly under the water’s pressure.
I went down a kind of electrically lit passageway that resembled a
phosphorescent glow from this so-called narwhale that so puzzled us
skillful coxswain, we were fouled on the bias rather than broadside,
accept the existence of an extremely powerful marine animal.
went into the lounge. The compass wasn’t encouraging. The Nautilus’s
“Conseil,” I said to my gallant servant, now at my side, “you realize
temperature in the globe’s lower strata is cooling appreciably every
its 356 seamen rather than surrender; and with its flag nailed up on
an underwater islet, or a derelict shipwreck, or a runaway reef, or
and highly distended pectoral fins shaped like wings, which enable
“Today,” Ned Land said.
plains obstructed by bushes. There I saw some magnificent birds
weren’t quite as clearheaded as one could wish.
misfires, we won’t get a second chance, and Captain Nemo will never
Other zoophytes swarming near the sponges consisted chiefly of a very
are!”
“Ye gods, I’ll sleep soundly,” Conseil said.
anemone from the genus Caryophylia formed a carpet of flowers all
“But will this channel fill up one day?”
Persian Gulf has no outlet, and if we enter those waters, it won’t be
think I’ve now earned the right to dub it that.
its last rays.
revulsion. Before my eyes there quivered a horrible monster worthy of
taste. Inlaid with ebony trim, tall oaken sideboards stood at both
Founders of Astronomy even gave me a definite date; and since I knew
located on the left bank of the East River, and in a few minutes we
France and Italy. With its bright colors, it lived up to those poetic
“What happened?” I instantly said to them.
“Good lord, professor,” Ned Land answered me, “don’t mention it! What
valves, fishermen even pull them loose with pliers. But usually the
sank into the waters like a cannonball, in other words, dropping as if
“Well?” I asked him.
fiery sparks: pink pearls pulled from saltwater fan shells in the Red
scorpionfish and human beings! Do you know how many eggs have been
solemn voice:
I broke out in a cold sweat. But why should I have been startled by
of water that has poured through all the earth’s rivers for the past
indigestion. In fact, it takes no less than sixteen dozen of these
recognized the leatherback turtle, a pretty rare species. For my part,
monster for good, spurning it in the style of Hippolytus repulsing the
That day, the sixth of our imprisonment, Captain Nemo concluded that
just fine during some Mississippi paddle-wheeler race, to “outstrip
emerged above the northerly horizon, rising in long spirals until
latter, after carefully observing the animal, called for his
not without good reason, I assumed that these two islands, plus the
“But Ned my friend,” Conseil said, “why not ask Captain Nemo for
“As for asphyxiation, captain,” I replied, “that isn’t a cause for
unravel this mystery I could count only on some future happenstance.
answering each other hurriedly. What was it? Had they spotted our
This tree is distinguished from other trees by a straight trunk forty
of the dagger yet unable to deliver the deciding thrust, in other
arms lashed the air, swooped on the seaman stationed in front of
Moigno, in Petermann’s Mittheilungen,* and at scientific chronicles in
which was crowned by a sharp peak 400 to 500 meters high. In addition
to the heart and catching the other after a few minutes’ chase!
catastrophes that the Nautilus would encounter on its run. When it
tanks were filled with the water that hadn’t yet congealed at our line
The captain then broke into speech:
“Correct, Mr. Naturalist,” he answered me, “and we’re going to fight
parrots here.”
while I offered resistance with one supreme exertion, he raised
every sea? Was it unintentionally that you traveled aboard that
and sends the coconuts tumbling; they fracture in their fall and are
blazing eyes. Perhaps I would never learn who he was, where he came
from our starting point. When I arrived on the platform that morning,
“Ye gods, sir!” Ned Land told me. “Your Captain Nemo—the devil take
adorned with callosities; its stings can inflict dangerous injuries;
the frigate kept well out when passing the Tuamotu, Marquesas, and
scrupulous care. Besides, Commander Farragut had mentioned that a
ATLANTIS
The next day, March 26, I returned to my miner’s trade, working to
I would not even attempt to understand the whim that induced Captain
“And what thinks our friend Conseil?” Ned Land asked.
longer than we will. Therefore, let’s concentrate on our chances of
“Meat!” he kept repeating. “Now we’ll eat red meat! Actual game! A
promised $100,000.00 and been none the poorer.”
biblical Days of Creation. What’s more, the formation of coal—in other
shot, he harpooned not one whale but two, striking the first straight
fished up from American seas, others colored reddish brown that
“From all this, may I assume that such a boat costs a fortune?”
Melbourne, Réunion Island, and Mauritius; far too much traffic for the
The sailors went back to their sculling, and the coxswain steered the
and when I lifted my arms, sometimes they would pass above the surface
“Unfortunately this bay forms an open, offshore mooring that’s
long while, and in that case three healthy, well-built specimens like
lobster, because spiny lobsters are the only type in the
I was prepared to greet Captain Nemo, but it was his chief officer who
steps to the rear. Conseil and I stayed next to each other, as if
from displeasing to me. I can’t express the intensity of my amazement
Sea, the Mediterranean, the Atlantic, the southernmost and
dugong outwit our every scheme.
“From its rigging and its low masts,” the Canadian replied, “I bet
are attached to its sides at its center of flotation; these fins are
“And if not today, then tomorrow, because we mustn’t wander too far
under more frightening circumstances? Were we lying in the dangerous
subject. For six months we had been prisoners aboard the Nautilus. We
were dealing with civilized people, and if it hadn’t been for this
I no longer knew what tactic to pursue, when Conseil told me:
accomplices in some act of revenge whose merits we can’t gauge.”
the argonaut, the squid, and the cuttlefish, and that the family
a fleet of American whalers, and we learned that they hadn’t seen the
the Indian, who jumped aside and avoided the shark’s bite but not the
in buckets of water.
“We can’t stay any longer in this boiling water,” I told the captain.
our Creator. That’s why I’ll keep on my guard, sir.”
gentle slope and disappeared under the waves.
visited the Tonga Islands and New Caledonia, headed toward the Santa
colored comb shells with gill covers, burrowing date mussels with a
sorrier still was the sight on its deck, where, lashed with ropes to
dinner! Why, in every country on earth, when you open your mouth, snap
scorpion measuring two to three meters, the ruthless enemy of cod,
love it as if it were my own flesh and blood! Aboard a conventional
holy-water fonts.
whales 400 years ago, these animals grew to bigger sizes than they do
together near the center of the pool, where there is the least
nationality that attracted him. It was an opportunity for him to
in the ocean’s lower strata?
developed flippers, which, as with their manatee relatives, form
Arriving within twenty feet of the skiff, the dugong stopped, sharply
Lesseps is now finishing up; his joining of these two seas will
But what happened to the Nautilus? Did it withstand the Maelstrom’s
manatee. Its oblong body ended in a very long caudal fin and its
you. For seven months we’ve been aboard your vessel, and I ask you
“Do these animals live a long time?” Conseil asked.
incomprehensible individual think I had detected some secret forbidden
hand motioned toward a spot within the liquid mass, and I looked
Nautilus’s whitish beacon, which was starting to grow pale in the
helmsman would instantly change the Nautilus’s heading.
“Yes, sir. When it overturned, that iceberg closed off every exit.”
“We’re going to escape!”
“Me?” Conseil replied. “I’m unable to! That’s my employer’s
submarine, the Nautilus, then conducts an underwater campaign of
reported this conversation to my two companions.
timepiece marked 2:30. In ten minutes the tide would reach its maximum
*Latin: “our sea.” Ed.
should have christened his ship the Argonaut.”
against its will.”
Indeed, under the dense foliage of this wood, a whole host of parrots
conclusion from these experiments was that, in all latitudes, the sea
was reinforced with copper mail that shielded the chest, protected it
swiftly hoisted myself to the summit of this half-submerged creature
brings it to life. I see some instruments hanging on the walls of this
I did justice to this meal. It was made up of various fish and some
offensive personal remarks.
couldn’t stand up to inquiries conducted in both the New World and the
leagues—and by then the Nautilus’s plating was tolerating a pressure
silver, and three magnificent tuna whose high speeds couldn’t save
extremely puzzled. Was it some sort of electrical discharge? Was I
The frigate sailed along the east coast of South America with
lecture on hunting ethics. Furnishing such arguments to a professional
at the bottom of the sea, I needed to enclose my head in a copper
rather shady conduct aroused the suspicion that the natives had
1,011.45 square meters, its volume 1,507.2 cubic meters—which is
could come to our rescue? Don’t you see that by solidifying, it could
the Sargasso Sea. This is an actual lake in the open Atlantic, and the
rose only 700 to 800 feet above the plains; but on its far slope it
secrets of our planet.”
back in their cabin without noticing it any more than I had. Like me,
frozen mass enclosing the southernmost pole forms a vast ice cap whose
“Get up! Get up!” shouted the fine lad.
“Help! Help!” I shouted, swimming desperately toward the Abraham
powerful telescope that could double as a cannon always ready to fire.
I took a seat in the lounge with Conseil. Through the open window we
“Noon!” I called.
Commander Bougainville; it stretches from Ducie Island to Lazareff
so sharply defined on shore. There the dust that saturates the air
ordinary glass beads whose insides were coated with Essence of
down. Then the shark’s jaws opened astoundingly wide, like a pair of
samphire, a small umbelliferous plant that keeps quite nicely, which
whether he wants to or not, we’ll head north again, in other words, to
views on the commander and crew of this boat.”
colors consisting only of pink, crimson, green, olive, tan, and
THE NAUTILUS didn’t change direction. For the time being, then, we had
“Nobody will ever make me believe,” Ned Land said, “that such animals
I was left to myself. Ned Land and Conseil avoided speaking to me,
This was obviously a blind alley with no possible outlet. So where was
bloated gobio (or black gudgeon) measuring two decimeters, grenadiers
cabochon snails, pandora shells, etc.
“We could even go to greater depths and find that temperature layer
or Le Havre. It soon vanished into the shadows.
longitude 156 degrees 30’ east, and had noted the natives of those
energy. Over the whole surface area, only two meters were left to be
title is used as a measure not of depth but distance. Ed.
Captain Harrington—whose good faith is above suspicion—in which he
to my two companions. Ned and Conseil had kept me alive during the
directive, and the galleons entered the Bay of Vigo.
the Nautilus’s nimble longboat doesn’t scare me. Unknown to the crew,
gas. When the device is operating, this gas becomes luminous and gives
arrange for your encountering a restaurant there. Accordingly, eat
of all, the magnificent spurred-star shell from New Zealand; then some
stormy weather that frequently threatened us.
strait, a passageway that even the boldest navigators hesitated to
Accordingly, our speed was twenty-five miles (that is, twelve
tenacious glue that paralyzes its movements. They will even go so far
a glimpse of American shores, was he about to show me the coast of
it. Apparently the unicorn had gotten wise to these plots being woven
whose large mouths bristle with small teeth and which let out thin
through his underwater passageway in secrecy? Perhaps.
cooked in a certain fashion, they make a very acceptable platter of
22. The Last Words of Captain Nemo
succeeded in completely stifling his heart.
sighted, studied, explored and experienced, is still possible!”
his eyes the agitation overwhelming me. What an agonizing day I spent,
secrete this polypary live by the billions in the depths of their
For some days we saw a large number of aquatic birds with webbed feet,
Equipped with a magnifying glass, he lit a fire of deadwood that was
air like a lightning rod, and I saw long sparks shoot down it.
meat that, when fresh, tastes like eel, when dried, like smoked
vessel. You’re going to voyage through a land of wonders. Stunned
daylight.
It took us two hours to reach the summit of this half-crystal,
between sentences. He was meditating out loud.
contain more nitrogen than oxygen when these animals are caught at the
There the captain fixed his position and used a chronometer to
the Mediterranean—”
get tired of such exciting hunting?”
seas! If his destiny is strange, it’s also sublime. Haven’t I
“Can you picture,” I asked them, “what this funnel must have been like
ceiling. I stared in genuine wonderment at this room so ingeniously
approaching shore was too close for comfort, contrary to the
going too far, I felt I could offer him this hope: Captain Nemo had
The next morning, February 11, the Nautilus’s pantry was enriched by
“Because it takes incalculable strength just to live in those deep
“Our sole difficulty,” Captain Nemo went on, “lies in our staying
“We’re going, Mr. Ned, where the captain’s fancy takes us.”
St. Lawrence. In despair, poor Ned went into seclusion like Captain
museum.”
Lincoln with frightening speed, stopped sharply twenty feet from our
Our nets also hauled in a bold, daring, vigorous, and muscular fish
While this bizarre scenery was glittering under our electric beams, I
see us. Conseil and I will go to the central companionway. As for you,
can your helmsman follow the course you’ve given him?”
intense, five miles to windward of the Abraham Lincoln. Despite the
“If all their eggs hatched, just four codfish could feed England,
a 500-ton craft and drag it into the ocean depths. They even reprinted
a position fix, true to his promise, Commander Farragut would have to
Professor Aronnax, the Nautilus is about to sink beneath the waves,
“And,” Conseil replied, “even more than patience, resignation.”
the Red Sea aboard the Nautilus?”
per hour, multiply its mass times its velocity, and you get just the
evidence of the catastrophe that had overtaken it! So this was the
platform, where I happened to be. I vowed not to let him go below
in the lava’s glow, which sometimes took on a startling
By 8:30 the Nautilus’s skiff had just run gently aground on a sandy
brightly lit by our electric rays. It seemed to me that the strait was
commonplace. There I saw numerous iron undersides, the phantasmagoric
coast of Africa, sweeps in a long oval, and returns to the Caribbean
seashell tissue. More than once their composition provoked comments
But it was difficult to make yourself heard above the deafening beats
“Yes, master, drunk from the nutmegs it was devouring under that
south and longitude 164 degrees 32’ east. Its shores seemed covered
me that the platform hatches were about to be closed. I took a last
turning to the Canadian and Conseil:
self-contained diving suit were decades before their time, yet modern
profound. Not a single object was visible past ten
he ordered us to crouch beside him at the foot of a wide crevice. His
Laccadive Islands. It likewise hugged Kiltan Island, a shore of
phenomenon, and through this law of farseeing nature, you’ll
because they haven’t had time to reach their full growth. That’s why
run-of-the-mill variety, and with your permission, I’ll leave it at
for them to smash a fisherman’s longboat to bits.”
all objects have a tendency to become ‘sinkers.’ Follow my logic
CHAPTER 5
tried to explain this inexplicable phenomenon, whose secret is yours
“True,” I replied. “But weren’t their fears exaggerated?”
Pasture. Seventy-four years ago to the day, at this very spot in
Indeed, larger blocks of ice soon appeared, their brilliance varying
where I could barely stand upright against the jolts of the
these underwater regions would suddenly appear before me.
“Without taking into account,” Ned answered, “that once we’re out of
us.
outstretched toward the sea, he contemplated the proud wreck with
catch me one of these delightful representatives of tropical nature!”
“Fake is more like it,” the Canadian replied sarcastically.
whales have played a major role. This is the animal that first dragged
created by scientists precisely for this unusual exhibit whose
nor on the platform. The positions reported each day on the world map
the well of the central companionway, I heard the hatch close sharply
before my eyes, and the bush changed into a chunk of stony nipples.
concerning us?
picturesque ruins took shape, betraying the hand of man, not our
unleashed on the surface of the waves? But only a few meters down, the
“Unless they recruit us to serve on the crew,” Conseil said, “and keep
I rushed onto the platform. The hazy silhouette of Pelusium was
“But what you undoubtedly don’t know, Professor Aronnax, is that at
could stand. The power of our beacon was increased a hundredfold, like
France?
its new adversary, repositioned itself on its belly, and headed
“Whatever you say, Ned.” Then, trying to imitate Captain Nemo’s
tons. Consequently, it cost 1,687,000 francs, hence 2,000,000 francs
“That comes,” I told him, “from the water temperature of the Gulf
show of the greatest hostility. It was raining stones and arrows.
“Well, master needs to eat his lunch! It’s prudent, because we have no
slow, because our feet kept sinking into a kind of slimy mud mixed
membrane-filled tunic that made up the animal’s mantle.
While exchanging this chitchat, we entered beneath the dark canopies
“Oh really, and I can prove it to you with a few simple figures.”
birds; boxfish armed with stings formed by extensions of their bony
Just then Captain Nemo and his chief officer appeared.
standpoints.
your disposal.
this army of distinctly nocturnal mollusks. They numbered in the
and twenty others were quivering above. With a sweep of the ax,
“On the fishing,” the Canadian replied. “Before we tackle the terrain,
Meanwhile Ned Land pulled the captain clear. Uninjured, the latter
see those blackish specks moving about?”
Oh, that Gulf Stream! It truly lives up to its nickname, the Lord of
“You don’t know? Fine, so much the better! At least its nationality
stony coral striped with twisting furrows, yellowish sea anemone from
passageway for the Nautilus. Then the waters of the Atlantic rushed
shoulders, and his black eyes gazed with icy assurance; calmness,
animal.
the Astrolabe came to grief?”
“Right away!” the Canadian replied.
overhears.”
thousandfold play of the light. On both sides I had windows opening
won’t end with it! Here lies supreme tranquility. The sea doesn’t
eyelids closed around his pupils to contract his huge field of vision,
Nautilus may have, it still couldn’t stand such dreadful pressures,
After being confined for over thirty hours, he and Conseil were
from his crew.
oblique angle to our waterline. Thus we went as deep as two or three
Captain Nemo gave me an odd look and gestured no. Which told me pretty
coincide with the South Pole proper. In fact, according to the
“What’s this? They’re firing at us!” I exclaimed.
Nautilus lay inside the breakers where the sea had a depth of thirty
silhouette against the brilliant glare that came from its far
“What’s more,” the Canadian added, “if they catch me, I’ll defend
The vegetation on this desolate continent struck me as quite
hurricanes.”
Now then, justly or unjustly, it was the “monster” who stood accused
might add that these capsules are no bigger than number 4 shot, and
the coast of Dutch Guiana, by the mouth of the Maroni River. There
perhaps several centuries. It would be most unfortunate if such a
“That means they don’t see us as castaways clinging to some wreckage!”
I’ll send you back to a world that must know nothing more of me?
appearing, and soon.
Then I heard the hatches close. The sea’s undulations, which had been
considerable distances. But none of them reached the Nautilus.
creatures knew where they stood on bipeds of our species, and I
By evening we had cleared 200 leagues up the Atlantic. Shadows
nobody heard a word about it. Not a single ship encountered
sunshine coming through the crater had grown stronger, shedding a hazy
“It is indeed a pressure gauge. It’s placed in contact with the water,
“With your own two eyes?”
“So, Professor Aronnax, you think the Nautilus won’t be able to float
important town in the country of Oman. I marveled at its strange
caudal fin curved, the back with seven big, black, parallel lines
the glow of an intense white light. Captain Nemo had just activated
America, and Norway.”
that the Abraham Lincoln was going at the rate of 18.5 miles per hour.
Back on board, the sailors helped divest us of our heavy copper
Then I sank into deep speculation, and Captain Nemo’s strange facial
the Strait of Gibraltar. By then the shores of Africa and Europe were
“Fine,” Conseil replied, “I’ll take master’s word for it. I won’t
fishing boats of the harvesters will gather, and these are the waters
dreadful spasms whose aftershocks knocked Conseil off his feet.
harmonies from some undefinable hymn, actual pleadings from a soul
breathe at the surface of the ocean, air was sucked into its lungs
and our electric beams made the bright limestone positively sparkle.
engines!”
not precisely state. He was tall, his forehead broad, his nose
won’t get any farther, neither your Captain Nemo or his Nautilus. And
fell as far as 73.5 centimeters. Our compass indications no longer
An Underwater Tour of the World
author and yachtsman, he went on frequent voyages—to Britain, America,
had gone on while he slept.
follow this man.”
Peninsula; on January 21 two years later, at a new southerly position
one by one and arranged them methodically inside the chest, filling it
animal life was represented by nothing more than sea lilies, starfish,
This reception was less than encouraging. But I was determined to give
was caused by myriads of tiny, luminous animals whose brightness
September 5, 1781, under the Count de Grasse, it took part in the
sulfurous obsidian. I expected these long plains to change into
“No,” I replied, “another bishop, Pontoppidan of Bergen, also tells of
the faint undulations caused by our walking. It filled me with real
mark the entrance of the narrows to Upper New York Bay.
quarters.
Assuredly, Ned and Conseil in combination added up to one outstanding
cool. Furthermore, he seemed to be raising certain objections that his
save it.”
foregrounds flashed by like lightning. But Conseil and I were able to
creating wide punctures.
Mt. Kapogo, which is 476 fathoms high.
After two hours of energetic work, Ned Land reentered, exhausted. He
To the south, ten miles from the Nautilus, a solitary islet rose to a
of an accidental encounter?”
these strata. The furnace that was the source of this inexplicable
the Count de Buffon’s encyclopedia says that cetaceans can live, and
“Yours to command, captain.”
“Is it true,” Conseil asked, “that they can sink ships?”
dozen cutlets destined to serve as the grilled meat course of our
the size of pigeons, white in color, the beak short and conical, the
going, the Creator of All Things has only to increase its heat, salt,
under such circumstances would be difficult enough for an individual,
with spines: starfish, feather stars, sea lilies, free-swimming
“The Spanish commanders in the convoy objected to this decision. They
particularly the Andaman Islands, Negroes don’t hesitate to attack
real dread of an explosion when he stood in the presence of one of the
Conseil, like me, had stopped before this splendid sight. Obviously,
accident had taken place.
lower strata?
speed, retreated, and was content to keep its distance.
During the night the water temperature rose to -1 degrees
weapons into these fleshy masses. An intense, musky odor filled the
an average speed of 18.3 miles per hour, a considerable speed but
“In Saint-Malo,” Conseil returned unflappably.
referring to it by the name Gulf of Colzoum, relates that ships
20. In Latitude 47° 24’ and Longitude 17° 28’
it disappeared beneath the waters.”
breathe. It took my breath away, in a manner of . . .”
that moving creatures can still be encountered where water plants no
me onward. Soon the nature of the seafloor changed. The plains of sand
on the world map. The captain approached, placed a finger over a
For two hours a whole aquatic army escorted the Nautilus. In the midst
loaded the blunderbusses, which can launch harpoons as far as a mile,
“the monster.”
marvelous sights. Its variety was infinite. It changed its setting and
“Never, sir. Just the northernmost seas, equally in the Bering Strait
A Runaway Reef
carapaces.
Nautilus’s rays, I could make out her features, which the water hadn’t
fallen under the general influence. At least so I thought. Perhaps his
Compass and the Astrolabe. He dropped anchor first at Botany Bay,
have weighed 20,000 to 25,000 kilograms. Its unstable color would
I RUSHED UP onto the platform. Yes, open sea! Barely a few sparse
“No,” the Canadian replied, “unless I’m badly mistaken, that’s some
superheating equipment that allowed the tension of its steam to build
gangway on a ship. After a stretch of some ten meters, a second door
cracking the Nautilus’s hull like glass?
waters. But what’s the purpose of this refuge? The Nautilus doesn’t
to lie flush with the surface of the ocean, that I understand. But
artocarpus fruit. Some still weren’t ripe enough, and their thick
on this to Commander Farragut. His face, ordinarily so emotionless,
regulated by a bellows mechanism and can be released only at its
liquid, he found the sought-for degree immediately and with certainty.
whose shrubbery grew ever more sparse. I observed that vegetable life
friends, or collections, I accepted the American government’s offer.
whole intertropical zone. Although the summer sun lavished its rays on
nightfall.”
quantities of magnesium chloride, potassium chloride, magnesium
filled me with extraordinary excitement.
or Wolf Larsen. However, Verne gives his hero’s brilliance and
steal away with a sudden dive, and it proved impossible to overtake
deprived of all contact with the shore, was hardly the man to keep me
entire world.
“Oh!” I said. “You know about—”
polar continent.
“But,” said Conseil, who perpetually returned to the didactic side of
11. The Nautilus
the hunter.”
advantage of our first opportunity to leave the Nautilus.”
polished, without moss or other blemish, carved into strange shapes,
consumes the oxygen contained in 100 liters of air, hence during
I did not reply.
that should have made it easier to capture.
“To tell the truth, friend Land, I know little more about it than you
repeat: opinion had crystallized as to the nature of this phenomenon,
either side is 170 meters. Consequently, the Nautilus had to maneuver
fists, vainly trying to hold back a sob. Then he added:
the shore, the sea was deserted. Not a boat, not a diver. Profound
“Only I’ve no idea what time it is, Professor Aronnax, unless maybe
of the most influential novels ever written, an inspiration for such
its flanks, could easily be confused with the conger eel. From the
in the event of a leak in any one section.
the waters. According to my calculations, we had to be quite close to
illness. He’s had a fit that’s lasted eight days and isn’t over even
“Besides, captain,” I added with still greater enthusiasm, “why
Infuriated, Commander Farragut kept twisting the thick tuft of hair
dish. In the air there passed sooty albatross with four-meter
“At my command. An electric wire connects me to the ship. I fire off a
“But think it over, because I don’t want to hide anything from
Here is what those circumstances entailed. Two miles to starboard lay
hero! The ocean outside is rising, and by a perfectly natural law of
coquina (seashells that actually hop around), top-shell snails, red
I’ll mention that at the bottom of the sea there exist veins of zinc,
“The South Pole!” Captain Nemo replied in a solemn voice, handing me
the pole.
remained content with this method of refining my work, and he rarely
must take into account the reduction in volume that occurs under a
Aphroessa was circular in shape, measuring 300 feet in diameter and
Louis-Philippe Peninsula, finally his hydrographic surveys of the
gill openings, furnished with a single dorsal fin placed almost
these animals let themselves be stoned to death without making any
embroidered by the hands of water nymphs, their festoons swaying to
appeared. He didn’t seem to notice my presence and began a series of
eye had plunged into my innermost thoughts, and I rushed outside the
and it formed a low mound.
shattered the valuable object in Conseil’s hands.
Red Sea won’t be our way back to Europe either.”
circular head adorned by short ears, its round eyes, its white
the instrument of our salvation rather than our destruction?”
deep. Truly, if that gallant lad had owned gills instead of lungs, I
with an intolerable stink of sulfur, and I could see scarlet flames of
have never exceeded a length of 56 meters—if they reach even that.
I could barely glimpse the swift passing of longnose sharks,
pointless to make a supply for on board.”
at least 200!
Ned Land and Conseil were there waiting for me. I questioned
aboard with them.
St. Paul Island, the Strait of Belle Isle, the St. Lawrence estuary!
JULES VERNE
Scomber, blue-black on top, silver on the belly armor, their dorsal
shells, spindle shells, conch shells, spider conchs, limpets, glass
nest and nourishment for myriads of crustaceans and mollusks, for
sweetens their flesh and makes it delicious eating.
layover would help or hinder Ned Land’s schemes I couldn’t have said.
“Now,” Captain Nemo said, “let’s look for our passageway.”
“Several leagues!” Conseil exclaimed.
side plates, and died out—not by diving under the water, since its
wouldn’t bet on the monster.
toward the Nautilus, and you could tell it had put on steam. Six miles
“Very pressing. Native dugout canoes are surrounding us, and in a few
Conseil’s dexterity, we overcame every obstacle.
“I’ve no more objections to raise,” I replied. “I’ll only ask you,
Ned Land, no human shoulders ever executed a higher shrug than the
There was just time to run to the rescue of the baleen whales. The
Our path was getting brighter and brighter. The red glow had turned
quickly I couldn’t tell if they deserved that name “eagle ray” coined
as experts agree, if its speed and direction were to change, the
struck this man. My chief officer was standing beside him. This man
as actually an underwater boat, more dangerous than any unearthly
“Because people know so.”
summary of the whole matter.
Yes, a thicket of dead trees! Trees without leaves, without sap,
and exchanged about ten words with his chief officer. The latter
“That’s called a milk sea,” I told him, “a vast expanse of white waves
from his eyes.
isn’t at the water’s edge but far inland; sharks don’t flip over
“However, the solution to this problem submitted to me can take the
uncertain terms, hadn’t he declared that the secret of his life
The Canadian then told me:
proposed naming this devilfish Bouguer’s Squid.”
courtesy. Even so, Ned Land hasn’t given up all hope of recovering his
said. “Swallowing a few gulps of salt water?”
“Still, they’re merely birds,” Conseil said.
the animal dies. These fish followed us in schools and supplied our
while there rose underfoot, like a covey of snipe, yellow fish from
“We haven’t a moment to lose. Pack as much into my trunk as you can,
This was where the Nautilus had been sent accidentally—or perhaps
So things happened on board that were quite odd to say the least,
Ned! I ask only to live 100 years more, the longer to remember you!
number, I’ve killed several. But no matter how powerful and well armed
“Yes,” I said, “it’s a wonderful sight! Isn’t it, Ned?”
glaciers on shore; sometimes I ventured out on a wobbling tree trunk
getting narrower and narrower.
steam.”
seething inside the plating of this barely perceptible Nautilus, I
be bound in this way to the Nautilus, we couldn’t go far either.”
thermometer marked -2 degrees to
tasty as bonito, all fish worth classifying in the ship’s pantry.
been turned off, and the motionless propeller let it ride with the
Island, and to this day, nobody knows where it went and perished?”
with wicks in advance!”
was almost noon. I spotted this fact in the perpendicularity of the
“Professor Aronnax,” Captain Nemo said, “I’ll answer you today just as
were separated from the sea by a ten-meter barrier. That’s how thick
was useless.
“Sir,” I told Captain Nemo, “to you belongs the honor of first setting
“Because I’ve seen big baleen whales, sir, whales measuring up to 100
“Oh, master can trust me on this,” Conseil said, taking the valuable
Just then, as if to take my side in the argument, a bubbling began
lounge and went about my work. I wrote up my notes until five o’clock
stopcock inside the boat was letting in water from outside, which
“But Ned my friend,” Conseil answered, “if it weren’t an underwater
“By the way,” Conseil said, “are we going in a favorable direction?”
The Canadian might have quoted a much lower price. So it was
nutmeg.
objects of great value. They’re my last mementos of those shores that
coasts of Europe and Africa on their commercial junkets! An ocean
In essence, numerous fish had caught his eye, and when fish pass by,
A sandy beach unfolded before us, measuring 500 feet at its widest
these disaster-filled times, when men tax their ingenuity to build
the bodies of baleen whales, which the narwhale attacks with
water fleas and carp lice, plus the class Annelida, which he would
foolish risks in all this darkness. Besides, how should we attack this
“What sort of craft is it, Ned?”
the day on the surface, churning the waves with its powerful propeller
Mr. Jacquinot, to the site of the shipwreck.
another, staring at that mysterious sea whose depths to this day are
sooner or later I wanted that book to see the light of day.
“To be sure,” Conseil replied serenely, “I do think they’ll have fun
“Besides, Mr. Nemo really lives up to his Latin name, since he
floated like wreckage from a ship, sometimes fastening onto our
“Oh, it’s moving off! It’s diving!” Ned Land exclaimed. “Damnation!
gravel protected it from any mollusks that might bore into it. It
to slay harmless beasts needlessly.”
Gueboroa Island only dimly. But numerous fires had been kindled on the
data he had obtained on the relative densities of the water in our
below its waterline, there gaped a symmetrical gash in the shape of an
intellectual pursuits. I’ve set our course east-northeast at a depth
light occupied the far side of the mountain.
armed with prickles on its head and stings on its fins, a real
little. Officers were probing the increasing gloom with their night
with their meal, were busy devouring it to the last crumb. Then a door
lighthouse.
three-quarters of all known fish. Example: the common perch.”
eavesdropping on his movements, not missing a single detail of his
escape from his boat.”
had already left behind the increasingly arid seafloor, where a
“If master’s eyes would kindly stop bulging, master will see farther!”
can vouch that it’s easy to turn into a full-fledged snail.
Japan, plus those seas south of the United States, the Gulf of Panama
Meanwhile the Nautilus rose slowly to the surface of the sea, and I
hard to make out! Neither English, French, nor German, that’s all we
with its mandibles or the suckers on its arms. And yet what monsters
bird with a wick, then light it up.”
Just then the whole crew returned on board, and the double outside
“The most learned men,” the captain said, “still have much to
the English language. For my part, I was simply distressed to see this
16. Shortage of Air
left stripes on this luminous atmosphere in their course.
“But where does he get those millions?” Ned Land asked.
what I saw and felt!
conduit—the “air carrier,” if you prefer—that allowed this beneficial
farther than 150 kilometers from Ireland.
parrots raucously on the wing, Papuan lories painted the subtlest
My eyes flew toward the clock. It was eleven in the morning. It had to
light over all the volcanic waste forever buried in the heart of this
gathering momentum. Its entire hull was vibrating.
they’re at least worth a stab of the fork.”
hull.”
A Pearl Worth Ten Million
lips wouldn’t let a single sound through. Conseil could still
won’t hug the coasts of France, England, or America, where an escape
read this man’s features like an open book. Without hesitation, I
one-fifths of a millimeter are found in forty square miles. As for me,
algebraic signs.
well-established reputation for beauty in the Malaysian marketplace.
place by bolts. This ladder leads to a manhole cut into the Nautilus’s
“What! There’s a passageway?”
and, in a word, life itself.”
my last pamphlets, my last newspapers, and ever since I’ve chosen to
The cetacean had rammed our frigate at about eleven o’clock in the
if to go along this plateau on which the telegraph cable rests, where
habitat is fresh water; sting rays, the snout pointed, the tail long,
valley forks into two arms, and to the north it ends in an enormous
to think it over before accepting.
“Professor Aronnax,” he asked me, “do you know the depth of the ocean
After some minutes a sharp hissing reached my ears. I felt a distinct
francs. I was full of wonderment at this unusual mammal, with its
they’re pulled up from the lower depths. Which bears out your
And in truth, although the fine lad was a classifying maniac, he was
a sparkling gold color, and the bright purple leatherjacket whose hues
of these high walls consisted of broken soil over which there lay
the rounded domes of its mosques, the elegant tips of its minarets,
easily distinguish objects 100 meters away. Farther on, the bottom was
of steam that shoot behind the locomotive of an express
known by the name “karawade”; then some sea poachers, fish belonging
green. Its eight arms (or more accurately, feet) were rooted in its
mullet corseted in gold stripes from head to tail, their shining fins
“Just because they don’t make a habit of it,” the Canadian replied in
wound given that man during some unexplained collision suffered by the
other heartily.
escape attempt, we wouldn’t have come out alive from this sea of fire.
semispheric parasols with russet stripes and fringes of twelve neat
sort of soft bread center whose flavor reminded me of artichoke.
that I could exactly plot the Nautilus’s course.
Our full electric power was then put on the pumps, which instantly
But how long would it take to navigate under the Ice Bank to the open
patience and zeal; they weren’t responsible for this failure; there
midwater but at a remarkable speed that I estimated to be at least
Conseil asked.
plunged into darkness, utter darkness. The ceiling lights went out so
that night, how the skiff escaped from the Maelstrom’s fearsome
Conseil and Land spent the long hours with me. Conseil had told his
babirusa would be ensconced in its cage at the zoo in the Botanical
went,” and to offer his services. He had left his Canadian friend
fifty-seven seconds, and highly skillful ones to eighty-seven; but
if it still resists, let’s put wings on the Nautilus and fly over it!”
Cable reaches its end point.
canal, by the way, of little use to a ship such as the Nautilus!”
the equator at longitude 142 degrees, and on the 4th of the same
movements of our walking. Captain Nemo and his muscular companion were
cannibals.”
the officers.
because the captain’s head had already disappeared into its metal
prized. Diving easily, these reptiles can remain a good while
coral, some slate-colored sea anemone including the species
deck paneling, carefully closed until that point; I up mast and hoist
to me, the skiff carried Captain Nemo, two crewmen, and the
goddess Diana, much in demand by rich Romans, and about which the old
“If, on the other hand, we do know every living species, we must look
“A great rarity, my gallant comrade, and above all very hard to
a sort of limestone tube fringed with leafy folds and much fought over
differences fade; and I’m dead, professor, quite as dead as those
legs like heavy artillery, watched us with unblinking eyes, while
the southerly coast. The Astrolabe went to its rescue and also ran
open mouth let water flow through its whalebone like a murmuring surf.
“I mean that nothing could be easier than taking a photograph of this
“It’s something that master should see.”
“It’s worth trying!” I said resolutely.
At first the passengers were quite frightened, but Captain Anderson
your breakfast like a man who’ll probably eat dinner only when it’s
completely closed off. Abreast of latitude 60 degrees, every
praise.”
clean horizon line.
without replying.
We were fully afloat, as I have said; but on both sides of the
Then a sudden thought terrified me. Captain Nemo had left his
But as beautiful as it was, I could get only a quick look at this
opportunity, despite the thirty miles that separated the Nautilus from
that fascinated me deeply.
On January 16 the Nautilus seemed to have fallen asleep just a few
windows seemed to be warping inward under the water’s pressure. And
“So our captain isn’t going to drop his anchors, put his engines on
blame yourself. Given the way the Nautilus was navigating, it would
driving power, the Nautilus had passed through the vessel’s mass like
reached a narrow valley gouged between high, vertical walls and
the amount of air it contains; on the other hand, master knows how
I felt “involuntarily reassured” in his presence, and this boded well
complete this “dry-land dinner.”
CHAPTER 8
are!” Rather, he was simply talking to himself, with long pauses
of dreadfully obsessive thoughts, I sat next to the beacon.
sodium. An induction coil gathers the electricity generated and
which were utterly saturated with those concentric gleams that swirl
dolphin’s stomach, he removed thirteen porpoises and fifteen
times as long as the cranium. Measuring three meters, their bodies
“No, Ned,” I replied, “but you know I don’t have your eyes.”
pointed a finger at some dark masses outlined in the shadows a short
dropped anchor before Vanikoro on July 7, 1827, in the same harbor of
flights—I spotted some magnificent albatross, birds belonging to the
the 27th, he entered the main lounge, as usual acting as if he’d been
whose appearance was repulsive to the eye. One animal no less hideous,
“Sir,” I told him, “to take up this subject a second time would be
up, we have to grab it.”
heralds of hurricanes, whose fearsome broadswords sometimes banged
unbearable.
because the equinox needn’t fall precisely at noon.”
Meanwhile, motionless and silent, Captain Nemo stood lost in
my interview with Captain Nemo. Had I discovered who he was, where he
insane. Professor, you must never make snap judgments about your
platform. The beast weighed 5,000 kilograms. It was carved up in sight
“Oh, if only I didn’t have to breathe, to leave more air for master!”
petrel and albatross cavorting in the midst of the turmoil. The
arrived at the wharf next to which the Abraham Lincoln was vomiting
“No, my friend. What’s Ned Land up to?”
phosphorescent glow that signaled the Nautilus’s presence. I saw its
every twenty-four hours . . .”
reef; he was even about to fix its exact position when two waterspouts
In the midst of the watery mass, brightly lit by our electric beams,
19. The Gulf Stream
direction a second time and cut straight to the west, heading toward
the sleeves ended in supple gloves that didn’t impede hand movements.
Before I could reply, white smoke streamed from the battleship’s
Then the Nautilus drew near the beaches of Africa, where the sea is
assumed a hexangular pattern. It’s a handy plant that nature gives to
with phosphorescent glimmers!
me; his eyes stayed stubbornly focused on that inscrutable point of
sun was sweeping in its extended arc.
by such other thinkers as Posidonius, Pliny, Ammianus Marcellinus,
world’s best mussels. Geese and duck alighted by the dozens on the
of feldspar and quartz crystals.
“Not that I’ve heard.”
since they didn’t stir. Their hides were rough and heavy, a tan color
So I didn’t allude to this event when, that evening, I chanced to be
place by the oars, Conseil and I rowed vigorously, and Ned steered us
boots, these two strangers were dressed in clothing made from some
gulf might dry up completely; on this score it’s inferior to its
Cerigo Island after doubling Cape Matapan, the Nautilus left the Greek
our ears. Everything seemed dead inside this boat. Was it in motion,
Abraham Lincoln moved out majestically amid a spectator-laden escort
them? Yes, surely, but I hardly knew how to go about it.
silence. “This is a separate world. It’s as alien to the earth as the
representatives of the order Pleuronecta, such as sole, flounder,
the Nautilus, dropped off their burdens inside, and went to resume
with blotches of bluish gray. It seemed as if we’d plunged into a pool
that excavating those sands would bring to light a great many weapons
man had kept his energy and composure. He had subdued physical pain
extremely late.”
“The Nautilus is made up of two hulls, one inside the other; between
that the sperm whales would be victorious, not only because they were
provisions of the highest quality, which the Nautilus’s speed and the
DURING THE NIGHT of March 13-14, the Nautilus resumed its southward
letting out deafening yells. The night passed in this way, without the
with water, the boat sank, and was fitted into its socket.
of unpredictable shape, which were confined to a narrow gamut of
centimeter on its surface!
captain had said, it weren’t capable of resisting like a solid block.
dozen Nile duck, superior-tasting wildfowl whose neck and crown of the
obtained can’t be adequately double-checked. By contrast, Captain Nemo
two hours.”
insane undertaking, one that could occur only in the brain of a
play of my lungs. Although our cell was large, we obviously had used
was pounding fit to burst.
even yet. A sorry sight, this carcass lost under the waves, but
master had best not depend on it to any great extent!”
take cover in the shade of these trees now turned to stone!
went up to about latitude 42 degrees. This brought it abreast of
“Captain?” I said.
existence is in jeopardy. If such is not the case, then at the first
dugong—which also boasts the name halicore—closely resembled a
look like bats, although an appendage made of horn, located near the
like dab or sole!”
“Maybe,” the Canadian answered, “it would be better to hunt it down,
launched to sea. Two crewmen carrying instruments, the captain,
When I rejoined Captain Nemo, I found him leaning silently against a
captain. He advanced over the platform, not seeming to notice my
to the Antarctic continent in latitude 63 degrees 26’ and longitude 66
lace ever spun by the followers of Arachne. Unfortunately I couldn’t
“But,” I went on, “once these parts were manufactured, didn’t they
sawed-off snakes, which darted over the platform amid waves of blood
place where Moses had pitched camp 3,300 years before him.”
Under my eyes I had the excellent charts of the Torres Strait that had
natural deformity I’d have to call it, something very seldom
sperm whale from a baleen whale! And yet, what a fine, gallant lad!
“Ned my friend,” Conseil answered, “what would you say if they’d given
Antarctic regions, twinkled at its zenith.
homola crabs with spiny fronts, hermit crabs, hairy porcelain crabs,
up their dungeons.
French, and Hindu villages. We wouldn’t go five miles without bumping
“No, sir,” he replied. “I can’t make out what nation it’s from. It’s
14,000 meters of sounding line without finding bottom. It was here too
leads into that lounge we’ve just left.”
Papua it’s another story. And we’ll always have that as a last resort
hydras from the genus Plumularia, those tropical creepers of the sea,
flee after this horrible act of revenge?
adult, as could be seen from the six rows of teeth forming an
the lounge. It’s actually our work room, and there you’ll learn the
or stationary on the surface of the ocean, or sinking into the depths?
unsolicited kind!
Verne’s Captain Nemo was a Polish nobleman whose entire family had
And when Conseil has spoken, there’s nothing else to be said.
waves of the Atlantic.
naturalists, I think these animals can be properly trained to perform
I had a seasoned specialist in biological classification, an
outdistanced by our speed and soon fell behind; temporarily, however,
more to the north, hugged the Murray Islands, and returned to the
several fruitless attempts, he managed to wound one of these
are to use this force; it’s sure to take the place of wind, water, and
Yet I decided to return to the Nautilus. We went along a steep, narrow
won’t run into one just like it?”
threw the beams of our beacon right back at us. Words cannot describe
anywhere.”
“We’re used to them, the rest of us,” Captain Nemo answered. “And in
“No, my friend. That task is performed with eleven strainers, or
and silver, cascades of jewels, pieces of eight. The sand was heaped
Papua is 400 leagues long by 130 leagues wide, with a surface area of
toughness—plus, after being launched with prodigious power and then
season and the period of summer prevailing winds. The Arab Idrisi,
-----
WOO
Having this thought in mind, the story of “The Wonderful Wizard of Oz”
Dorothy did not know what to say to this, for all the people seemed to
“That will not trouble him,” continued the man, “for Oz has a large
“I was afraid I should have to stay in the river forever,” he said,
“To wash my face clean after the dust of the road, and to drink, so the
right into the middle of the group. Toto had always loved to chase mice
the point on the end of her nose, while she counted “One, two, three”
“It must be inconvenient to be made of flesh,” said the Scarecrow
with the old woman, waiting for me to come after her.
and blood-curdling incidents devised by their authors to point a
“I have been very kindly treated in your lovely City, and everyone has
airtight, after which he announced that the balloon was ready.
confidentially, “I don’t mind my legs and arms and body being stuffed,
for his great leaps had made his breath short, and he panted like a big
“But that isn’t right. The King of Beasts shouldn’t be a coward,” said
should go out of this Palace my people would soon discover I am not a
stretched out until the top of the head, where it was flat, struck the
travelers went in search of the Witch she had seen them coming, and so
year than they were last, I am sure Uncle Henry cannot afford it.”
yawned. “And where are you going?”
“Quelala being the first owner of the Golden Cap,” replied the Monkey,
“I know it,” returned Dorothy, “but we have lost the Scarecrow, and are
foot long; but its head was joined to the pudgy body by a neck as
it the Emerald City; and to make the name fit better I put green
“That’s why he went over so easily,” remarked the Lion. “It astonished
was halfway across the room there came a great shriek from the wind,
walked along he sang “Tol-de-ri-de-oh!” at every step, he felt so gay.
eye, and as soon as it was finished I found myself looking at him and
“if I run I may fall down and break myself.”
“I am Oz, the Great and Terrible. Who are you, and why do you seek me?”
The Monkeys had set them down near a farmhouse, and the four travelers
upon her head. Then she stood upon her left foot and said slowly:
immense and powerful wings on his shoulders.
“That’s all right,” said the Scarecrow. “You are quite welcome to take
dominions.”
used the charm of the Cap. Once was when she had made the Winkies her
“Carry us over the hill to the country of the Quadlings,” answered the
church. They are all so brittle!”
gray mass, with little cracks running through it. Even the grass was
and soon saw a beautiful green glow in the sky just before them.
They left the cottage and walked through the trees until they found a
again; but when she thought it all over she was glad she had not gone
the head, I am sure I shall not be given a heart, since a head has no
dreadful-looking monster could not be imagined. It was fortunate the
“‘Why, he is a man,’ said the other, and I quite agreed with him. The
when Dorothy had finished telling him everything that had happened, “I
she could not understand. The Lion was also puzzled to know what was
she noticed coming toward her a group of the queerest people she had
beast was a little gray field mouse, and although he had no heart he
The next morning Dorothy kissed the pretty green girl good-bye, and
“Nor I my heart,” declared the Tin Woodman. “It seems to me I can
Of course this was a bad thing for the Scarecrow.
do not I will make an end of you, as I did of the Tin Woodman and the
“Good-bye!” shouted everyone, and all eyes were turned upward to where
“Kill the Wicked Witch of the West,” answered Oz.
down to the little brook and filled it with clear, sparkling water.
is to fill it with hot air. Hot air isn’t as good as gas, for if the
fierce, and may not allow you to destroy her. Keep to the West, where
barking furiously.
sure I do not want to kill anybody, even to see Aunt Em again.”
across the ditch again.
[Illustration]
“Then that accounts for it. In the civilized countries I believe there
But the pretty milkmaid was much too vexed to make any answer. She
people gazed upon it with much curiosity. The Tin Woodman had chopped a
spectacles night and day. They are all locked on, for Oz so ordered it
“And I should not have had my lovely heart,” said the Tin Woodman. “I
the water they could see the road of yellow brick running through a
with sawdust.
head; but he would not say what they were because he knew no one could
“LET DOROTHY GO TO THE CITY OF EMERALDS”
as tall as Dorothy, who was a well-grown child for her age, although
But when Gayelette came running out to him she found his silks and
So she called the Winkies to help her, and they walked all that day and
one I am a humbug.”
brains, and it is worth a lot of bother to be able to think properly.”
pure white but her eyes were blue, and they looked kindly upon the
She was dressed in green silk gauze and wore upon her flowing green
But Dorothy, knowing her to be a witch, had expected her to disappear
well as before.
“I hope so,” said Dorothy earnestly, “since you seem anxious to have
unhappy unless you give me brains.”
not care whether I married her or not. I suppose she is still living
grant my request,” answered the Lion.
wailing, despairing voice.
Therefore it was decided to start upon their journey the next morning,
is it?”
Oz, left to himself, smiled to think of his success in giving the
Kansas, and live with Aunt Em and Uncle Henry.”
Dorothy went to the Witch’s cupboard to fill her basket with food for
Then Oz painted it on the inside with a coat of thin glue, to make it
shaking his head in perplexity. “He is powerful and terrible, and if
was no way of going around it, for it seemed to extend to the right and
I would marry, so that I might not become lonely.
been painted, but the sun blistered the paint and the rains washed it
became quite friendly with the little girl.
the only thing I could do. Sit down, please, there are plenty of
axe and they all passed through the forest until they came to the road
Wicked Witch dies you will not see your uncle and aunt again. Remember
iron invisible to human eyes. So that when Dorothy walked across the
Dorothy picked them up and had the Winkies carry them back to the
Shoes which the girl always wore. Her bees and her crows and her wolves
beautiful. And I am sure Aunt Em will be dreadfully worried over my
side of the country and came to another china wall.
“My grandfather was at that time the King of the Winged Monkeys which
“I always did like flowers,” said the Lion. “They seem so helpless and
wonder, for he was as big as a small horse.
“Good-bye!” they all answered, and away the Queen ran, while Dorothy
that they almost stood upon their heads.
the Lion,” said the Wicked Witch. “Bring that beast to me, for I have a
So they sat down to consider what they should do, and after serious
“You are unusual,” replied Glinda.
safely down they picked up the Scarecrow, whose body was quite
Great Wizard I told you of.”
entered the back room and took up a measure of bran, which he mixed
“And aren’t you?” she asked.
confidence in yourself. There is no living thing that is not afraid
This ended the saying of the charm, and they heard a great chattering
“What can I do for you, my child?” she asked.
the desert. Good-bye.”
her umbrella and the brave little dog flew at her and bit her leg in
presence.”
it leads us.”
“What shall we do now?” asked the Tin Woodman, as the Lion lay down on
whiskers, and he crept back tremblingly to a spot nearer the door.
But the wicked creature was very cunning, and she finally thought of a
escape.
stood upon his head.
another forest, where the trees were bigger and older than any they had
“Your house did, anyway,” replied the little old woman, with a laugh,
joints properly oiled. The Scarecrow stuffed himself with fresh straw
and mouth, and was much bigger than the head of the biggest giant.
“I don’t know,” replied Dorothy sorrowfully, “but it is my home, and
first glimpse of the world.
go to drive. But as she opened the gate the Lion gave a loud roar and
“I am never hungry,” he said, “and it is a lucky thing I am not, for my
“Take out my straw and scatter it over the little girl and the dog and
“Drink.”
teeth.
Chapter XXIII. Glinda The Good Witch Grants Dorothy’s Wish
“No, indeed. I don’t know anything. You see, I am stuffed, so I have no
So the Tin Woodman followed him and came to the great Throne Room. He
“Permit me to introduce to you her Majesty, the Queen.”
broken that was the end of the black bees, and they lay scattered thick
“And I shall get my courage,” said the Lion thoughtfully.
how it can be done.”
in the palace, but now, to her surprise, she found it was no longer
carry you over the desert. In the meantime you shall all be treated as
back.
biggest and kindest and most loving heart in all the Land of Oz.”
She came close to Dorothy and kissed her gently on the forehead. Where
The sun shone brightly as our friends turned their faces toward the
The first day’s journey was through the green fields and bright flowers
“I was born in Omaha—”
“Now oil the joints in my arms,” he said. And Dorothy oiled them and
“Don’t you dare to bite Toto! You ought to be ashamed of yourself, a
“I am now worse off than when I first met Dorothy,” he thought. “Then,
not seem to be as friendly as the Munchkins, and I’m afraid we shall be
fitted her as well as if they had been made for her.
“Where is this great spider of yours now?” asked the Lion.
flowers that were everywhere about; so presently her eyes grew heavy
you many days. The country here is rich and pleasant, but you must pass
air, being carried by a cyclone. So I believe the best way to get
came to you to beg that you give me courage, so that in reality I may
climbed on the Lion’s back, holding tightly to his mane with one hand.
“‘Swim out, my fine fellow,’ cried my grandfather, ‘and see if the
the Witch actually melting away like brown sugar before her very eyes.
The Wicked Witch was so angry when she saw her black bees in little
green he was completely covered with cracks, running every which way
“Why, it is said that he never lets anyone come into his presence. I
Home Again
anyone.
there.”
turning his head (which worked beautifully on hinges) he saw a strange
“But how about my courage?” asked the Lion anxiously.
glowing he could scarcely bear to gaze upon it. His first thought was
her and killed her,” she replied.
he said; and the Scarecrow agreed with him. So they kept walking until
“And back to Kansas?” she asked eagerly.
“Very well,” said the Queen, “we trust you. But what shall we do?”
to come back and rule over them as soon as Dorothy was safely on her
will roll this head all about the room until he promises to give us
“‘I think I’ll make the other a little bigger,’” said the farmer. And
Scarecrow, “What will you do when Dorothy has left us?”
little girl would who had been suddenly whisked away from her own
close to the Witch and said, “You have called us for the third and last
nuts at the people who walked in the forest. But we were careless and
at Dorothy as if to ask what they should do next.
“Ep-pe, pep-pe, kak-ke!”
cried out, “Who are you?”
“How, then, are we to find her?” inquired the girl.
road again,” remarked the Lion.
back to Kansas at once.”
his surprise, that before the throne was a Ball of Fire, so fierce and
“I was born the son of a woodman who chopped down trees in the forest
“Oh,” she said, “I know.”
“My third command to the Winged Monkeys,” said Glinda, “shall be to
But the Monkey King shook his head.
hole.
Chapter XXII
long been out chasing birds around him and squirrels. She sat up and
said to be kindly hearted.”
you had brains in your head, instead of straw.”
now no heart, so that I lost all my love for the Munchkin girl, and did
the Wizard, “although he does not like to have people ask to see him.
instead of with brains, as yours is, how am I ever to know anything?”
that he might rust, and so dried his tears on Dorothy’s apron.
“Because,” answered the Princess, also stopping, a safe distance away,
looked so ugly that its foe turned up his nose in disgust. Its legs
“Good gracious!” she cried.
beast in all the forest would have had a good word to say to me.”
that I couldn’t come down again. It went way up above the clouds, so
They were all tired out when they reached the shore at last and stepped
that she would not be hungry for a long time. She thought this was very
and passed under the tree without injury, except Toto, who was caught
Dorothy wanted to see more of the Princess, so she ran after her. But
they had passed safely through, although they had suffered many
beast and he had given up at last, and fallen only a short distance
shame to deprive the people of so wonderful a ruler.”
“You promised to send me back to Kansas when the Wicked Witch was
over the swaying floor to her bed, and lay down upon it; and Toto
“Certainly. If it wasn’t for Dorothy I should never have had brains.
peculiar that you prefer cooked food, and then you will have a very
Emerald City was built a great many years ago, for I was a young man
“Or send me back to Kansas,” said Dorothy.
“Very well,” answered the little man. “But I shall have to cut a hole
golden buckles on their shoes; and princes with jeweled crowns upon
the thing to take a long walk in, for they could not wear out.”
To be sure, the broad river now cut them off from this beautiful land.
and should be treated with respect?”
me to see him whirl around so. Is the other one stuffed also?”
around him with joy. “Never have I seen a more beautiful place.”
again, while Toto ran around them and chased the moths and butterflies,
seen it. The South is the country of the Quadlings.”
“If I cannot harness you,” said the Witch to the Lion, speaking through
Wizard.”
two of the Monkeys caught Dorothy in their arms and flew away with her.
set her down upon the front doorstep. Then the leader said to the
you.”
exact center of the cyclone. In the middle of a cyclone the air is
Then all the Winged Monkeys, with much laughing and chattering and
beauty was so great that Gayelette loved him dearly, and hastened to
“I haven’t the faintest idea,” said the Tin Woodman, and the Lion shook
Monkey seized Toto and flew after them, although the dog tried hard to
they like me; but ever since this Palace was built, I have shut myself
Chapter XX. The Dainty China Country
see, here in our country we live contentedly, and can talk and move
This the Woodman did, and as Dorothy lay close beside the Lion and held
“This is all true,” said Dorothy, “and I am glad I was of use to these
Chapter XVI. The Magic Art of the Great Humbug
“If you have,” continued the Tin Woodman, “you ought to be glad, for it
“What makes you a coward?” asked Dorothy, looking at the great beast in
“Only a mouse!” cried the little animal, indignantly. “Why, I am a
While I was in love I was the happiest man on earth; but no one can
know where Kansas is, for I have never heard that country mentioned
“Oh, Oz could do that easily enough,” declared the man. “He has more
diamonds; and to the Scarecrow they gave a gold-headed walking stick,
Then Oz got into the basket and said to all the people in a loud voice:
“Why should I do this?” demanded the Beast.
pretty. Here he comes now, so you can see for yourself.”
one so cowardly. But let us go on.”
“But who was she?” asked Dorothy.
pointed caps. And, strangest of all, these people were all made of
“Is he stuffed?” asked the Lion in surprise, as he watched her pick up
They were obliged to camp out that night under a large tree in the
Tin Woodman.
greatly amused Dorothy. Toto was a fine curiosity to all the people,
from behind, and they got along better. Soon they rolled the Lion out
after the stock.” Then he ran toward the sheds where the cows and
forward, and the Lion crossed over the tree and turned to see what they
“It came down gradually, and I was not hurt a bit. But I found myself
that she had really melted away to nothing, Dorothy drew another bucket
the Scarecrow and set him upon his feet, while she patted him into
“I cannot tell,” was the answer, “for I have never been to the Emerald
wonder where she should pass the night, she came to a house rather
that country, where the Winkies live, is ruled by the Wicked Witch of
“How can I cross the desert?” she inquired.
generally still, but the great pressure of the wind on every side of
return. The Witch did not bleed where she was bitten, for she was so
followed by all his band.
Wizard, and then they would be vexed with me for having deceived them.
there came a day when I forgot to do this, and, being caught in a
gnashed her teeth. And then she called a dozen of her slaves, who were
Away to the South
great claws grabbed the Scarecrow by the arm and carried him up into
“We must try to find him,” said the girl.
the heavily loaded truck; but the Woodman and the Scarecrow both pushed
very first day you came to this country.”
the following story:
When Dorothy stood in the doorway and looked around, she could see
they set to work in one of the big yellow rooms of the castle and
She watched Dorothy carefully, to see if she ever took off her shoes,
around the table and Dorothy ate some delicious porridge and a dish of
at the many forms the Great Wizard could take upon himself, and the
holiday, then and ever after, and spent the time in feasting and
to rooms, and each one of them found himself lodged in a very pleasant
“How about my heart?” asked the Tin Woodman.
his mouth, for his jaws were tightly rusted together. He became greatly
“What can I do for you?” she inquired softly, for she was moved by the
good friends. But now that each of them has had what he most desired,
with blue tops, such as every man wore in this country, and the figure
“That is true,” agreed the Woodman. “My axe may be of service to her;
Oz ordered the balloon carried out in front of the Palace, and the
“Perhaps you have heart disease,” said the Tin Woodman.
Dorothy.
When the Scarecrow had bowed, as prettily as his straw stuffing would
return for my help—such as it is. You must keep my secret and tell no
its ruler and the people like me. The only thing that worries me is how
Then they told him of the field mice, and how they had generously saved
right foot.
the china girl cried out:
“I do not know,” said the Head; “but that is my answer, and until the
and as long as I know myself to be a coward I shall be unhappy.”
followed and lay down beside her.
She was surprised, as she walked along, to see how pretty the country
“What can we do, then?” she asked.
wolves lying dead, and the strangers still traveling through her
south, and as they turned their eyes that way they saw ripples in the
imagination to carry Dorothy back to Kansas, and I’m sure I don’t know
exclaimed:
with a green carpet and lovely green furniture set with emeralds. The
In a wardrobe were many green dresses, made of silk and satin and
Woodman and said:
he leaned against the tree.
help Dorothy to get home, first.”
entered the Throne Room he greeted her pleasantly:
a heart; for a fool would not know what to do with a heart if he had
legs against the tree and pushed with all his might, and slowly the big
So they passed through the Palace Gates and were led into a big room
has returned to her own home, what will become of you?”
“It’s a mystery,” replied the Lion. “I suppose I was born that way. All
Golden Cap, whosoever he may be.”
disturbed. The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman stood up in a corner and
about Kansas, and how gray everything was there, and how the cyclone
come to an end, and that they were no longer prisoners in a strange
scent of the bright flowers.
piece of string in his mouth. It was about this time that Dorothy woke
“Oh, indeed!” exclaimed the man. “Are you sure that Oz will see you?”
the hill.
“Perhaps there are wild beasts in the forest now,” said Dorothy.
After a few moments she came back to say that Dorothy and the others
The King Crow flew at the Scarecrow, who caught it by the head and
next moment a great Lion bounded into the road. With one blow of his
straw; and if you will bring him back to us, we shall thank you ever
said the Lion.
the Lion explained that the animals were holding a meeting, and he
may converse with me.” Indeed, the Voice seemed just then to come
voice:
before. But tell me, is it a civilized country?”
The Winged Monkeys
part of the next until they came to the rocky plain where the Tin
The Wicked Witch was both surprised and worried when she saw the mark
They found the ladder so heavy they could not pull it up, so the
“And now,” said Dorothy, “how am I to get back to Kansas?”
“We are on our way to the Emerald City to see the Great Oz,” she
blue and purple blossoms, besides great clusters of scarlet poppies,
did not need to be wiped away. As for the Lion, he wiped his eyes so
other side. They were all greatly pleased to see how easily he did it,
with a great many pins and needles. Having shaken them together
painted face.
they were, so far as looks go, many years older.
now. When Dorothy, who was an orphan, first came to her, Aunt Em had
when the second eye was done I could see much better than before. Then
they started along the path of yellow brick for the Emerald City.
larger than the rest. On the green lawn before it many men and women
of tin. His head and arms and legs were jointed upon his body, but he
watching the sad fate of her comrades and thinking it would soon be her
they are full of mischief and think it great fun to plague us.”
if you killed a poor deer, and then my jaws would rust again.”
back.
“And then I should get no brains,” said the Scarecrow.
Next she stood upon her right foot and said:
kept her very snug and warm, and she slept soundly until morning.
me proof that the Wicked Witch is dead, and that moment I will give you
She opened a little door and Dorothy walked boldly through and found
me, and after looking at me carefully he perched upon my shoulder and
them, never fear!”
where Dorothy had hit it.
The Scarecrow went in and found the little man sitting down by the
and left them a sober gray; they had taken the red from her cheeks and
they thought they could mend him so he would be as good as ever. So
Glinda leaned forward and kissed the sweet, upturned face of the loving
messenger to me, and I came at once. I am the Witch of the North.”
Dorothy followed her through many of the beautiful rooms in her castle
They walked carefully through the china country. The little animals and
But when the Woodman entered the great Throne Room he saw neither the
“Oh, I am a ventriloquist,” said the little man. “I can throw the sound
“If you wish,” said the Lion, “I will go into the forest and kill a
fellow travelers.
written in big, white chalk marks:
they had grown so fond of the Tin Woodman that they begged him to stay
The Scarecrow went sorrowfully back to his friends and told them what
life. So hereafter you must all serve him, and obey his slightest
across the road. But this one was so broad and deep that the Lion knew
“So I did. I don’t care who kills her. But until she is dead I will not
near to cover Dorothy with dry leaves when she lay down to sleep. These
“Or I my courage?” asked the Lion.
trees and sunshine to cheer them, and had they not felt so sorry for
than being a Scarecrow.”
one came near them nor spoke to them because of the great Lion, of
saving my life,” added the Queen.
Sorrowfully Dorothy left the Throne Room and went back where the Lion
of my voice wherever I wish, so that you thought it was coming out of
“What shall we do now?” asked Dorothy.
During the rest of that day there was no other adventure to mar the
“Look!”
Fortunately, the Witches of the North and South were good, and I knew
city and long for the woods and the country again. I am really a wild
beetle that was crawling along the road, and killed the poor little
the cupboard and cut herself some bread, which she spread with butter.
with Toto and pulled his tail and crowed and laughed in a way that
But my feet would not touch the ground, and I was forced to stay on
corner. She lay down at once, and with Toto beside her soon fell into a
brains as soon as we get to the Emerald City.”
strange and beautiful country.
I’m sure it’s somewhere.”
rescuing him, he was so pleased that he wept tears of joy, and Dorothy
“This at first seemed a great misfortune, for I knew a one-legged man
a humbug.”
“Because you are wise and powerful, and no one else can help me,”
“Oh, I’m not afraid,” replied the Scarecrow. “He can’t hurt the straw.
barking loudly; but Dorothy sat quite still on the floor and waited to
you.”
window, engaged in deep thought.
“Certainly,” answered the Queen; “but it is a great way off, for you
leg. Again I went to the tinsmith, and again he made me a leg out of
castle, where they were stuffed with nice, clean straw; and behold!
though he may have reached Omaha safely, and be there now, for all we
“No, my head is quite empty,” answered the Woodman. “But once I had
of the court, all dressed in rich costumes. These people had nothing to
being stuffed with straw, it was quite light.
clothing of a lovely emerald-green color and wore peaked hats like
“And I should have lived a coward forever,” declared the Lion, “and no
“What are the Kalidahs?” asked the girl.
with the green whiskers for a big clothes basket, which he fastened
missing altogether, leaving holes that Toto jumped across and Dorothy
Great Wizard, and can take on any form he wishes. So that some say he
mind to harness him like a horse, and make him work.”
When it was daylight, the girl bathed her face in a little rippling
was also a powerful sorceress. All her magic was used to help the
being able to sleep, he passed the night moving his joints up and down
of the Golden Cap to no purpose,” she said, “for the Winged Monkeys
arms growing out of its body, and it also had five long, slim legs.
“which he has covered with a golden plate, to keep it from running
“And I shall get back to Kansas,” cried Dorothy, clapping her hands.
had been trying to think, but could not because his head was stuffed
well-polished boots with a deep roll of blue at the tops. The men,
yellow brick. When she had gone several miles she thought she would
scampered out of sight, with all the mice hurrying after her.
the Lion,” he said to the Woodman, “and the bees cannot sting them.”
must end.
branches on the other side.
until a Stork flew by, who, upon seeing them, stopped to rest at the
Thereafter he walked very carefully, with his eyes on the road, and
speak, and to see him bow and walk along beside her.
They began walking through the country of the china people, and the
laughed, when he came to the top of the water, and swam in to shore.
When she brought it into the Throne Room she spoke the magic words, and
them. The Guardian of the Gates found a pair that would just fit
So Dorothy took a needle and thread, and as fast as Oz cut the strips
“No; there were some, but the monster has eaten them all. And, besides,
Chapter XXI
with his coat sleeve.
Dorothy was going to ask another question, but just then the Munchkins,
the ground was carpeted with them. There were big yellow and white and
“And I think I shall need their service just those three times,”
“I am only a Scarecrow, stuffed with straw. Therefore I have no brains,
It was Toto that made Dorothy laugh, and saved her from growing as gray
there was scarcely enough for herself and Toto for the day.
scrambled eggs and a plate of nice white bread, and enjoyed her meal.
“I never thought of that!” said Dorothy joyfully. “It’s just the thing.
“But I cannot!” exclaimed Dorothy, greatly surprised.
axe, he marched up to the first tree that had handled the Scarecrow so
“A man who goes up in a balloon on circus day, so as to draw a crowd of
flower bed as soon as you can. We will bring the little girl with us,
and rose into the air, until finally the basket just touched the
me to.”
made a chair with their hands for the seat and their arms for the arms
“This forest is perfectly delightful,” declared the Lion, looking
When it was all ready, Oz sent word to his people that he was going to
“I do not know,” answered Boq gravely, “for I have never been there. It
Head, made out of many thicknesses of paper, and with a carefully
made them all look up, and to their horror they saw running toward them
suddenly upon the floor.
the river the swift current swept the raft downstream, farther and
pick a beautiful flower; and after a time the Tin Woodman cried out:
mark of the Good Witch’s kiss upon her forehead and stopped short,
“If you see any house, or any place where we can pass the night,” she
mouth, where he eats it as a spider does a fly. Not one of us is safe
kitten, and Dorothy at last found him. She picked him up and ran
before the Woodman.
making believe.”
can chop it down, so that it will fall to the other side, we can walk
upon field of ripening grain, with well-paved roads running between,
return I shall be as other men are.”
climb it; but the Woodman said at once, “I’ll chop it down, and then we
up and would not see any of them.
away.”
company, and while the woman was busy laying the table the man asked:
So the Scarecrow led her through the trees until they reached the
she was.
and looked at her sharply and steadily. Then the mouth moved, and
Scarecrow in the middle and sent him tumbling, over and over, down the
There was a bell beside the gate, and Dorothy pushed the button and
again set eyes on a Winged Monkey, which we were glad to do, for we
the desert, so she may know a way to cross it.”
scarecrows in Kansas ever wink; but presently the figure nodded its
the heart.”
“It shall be done,” said the King, and at once the Winged Monkeys
lying asleep, with her friends all about her. They were a long distance
When they were all quite presentable they followed the soldier girl
yellow Wildcat, and the Woodman thought it must be chasing something,
her, she was sure, to make him draw her chariot whenever she wished to
When she had finished her meal, and was about to go back to the road of
“This must be the Land of Oz,” said Dorothy, “and we are surely getting
Chapter XIV
Oz. As Dorothy entered they looked at her curiously, and one of them
it glued on again. What do you mean by coming here and frightening my
rhinoceros, only there were five eyes in its face. There were five long
farther away from the road of yellow brick. And the water grew so deep
if I roared very loudly every living thing was frightened and got out
when he saw a tiny ant toiling by he would step over it, so as not to
truck was all ready for them.
you wish me to use my magic power to send you home again you must do
Witch then made the axe slip and cut off my head, and at first I
in a disagreeable country, full of bogs and marshes and covered with
while he called to the mice, “Come back! Come back! Toto shall not hurt
caught Toto by the ear, and dragged him into the room again, afterward
“And I thought Oz was a lovely Lady,” said the Scarecrow.
“Go on,” exclaimed Dorothy.
“Oil my neck, first,” replied the Tin Woodman. So she oiled it, and as
the poor Scarecrow!”
down and saw a strange sight.
“Who are you and where are you going?” asked the Stork.
“If he wasn’t so big and heavy I would get him for you,” remarked the
“Certainly; that is why I know it,” returned the Scarecrow. “If it
and did not even bark in return.
to think that the greatest loss I had known was the loss of my heart.
First they came to a great hall in which were many ladies and gentlemen
The Country of the Quadlings
and gladly dispenses with all disagreeable incident.
Lion said:
Emerald City.
And the Lion answered, “I am a Cowardly Lion, afraid of everything. I
“This isn’t the road,” said the Stork, as she twisted her long neck and
spectacles, why of course everything you see looks green to you. The
“Have you brains?” asked the Scarecrow.
will make the attempt.”
were all afraid of her.
Glinda the Good stepped down from her ruby throne to give the little
So, when they came to a good-sized farmhouse, Dorothy walked boldly up
cannot help me.”
“And I shall never have a heart,” spoke the Tin Woodman.
me for taking your head off, but I shall have to do it in order to put
wicked that the blood in her had dried up many years before.
“Because that isn’t the way we Lions do these things,” he replied. Then
Land of the South. They were all in the best of spirits, and laughed
One, much bigger than the others, seemed to be their leader. He flew
So he sprang into the water, and the Tin Woodman caught fast hold of
It was some time before the Cowardly Lion awakened, for he had lain
“They surely will never do for a long journey, Toto,” she said. And
“Yes, and a quick way out of our troubles,” replied the Lion. “How
The false Wizard looked at him carefully.
again.
and none could live to cross it.”
the little girl thought she had lost him. But soon she saw one of his
“What can I do for my friends?”
from the fire, as he feared a spark might get into his straw and burn
“The road to the City of Emeralds is paved with yellow brick,” said the
“Wait a minute!” called the Scarecrow. He had been thinking what was
“Well, that’s respect, I expect,” declared the Clown, and immediately
strap, and sent them back to their work, after which she sat down to
brick, silently wondering, each in his own mind, if ever they would
“Your Silver Shoes will carry you over the desert,” replied Glinda. “If
“That is true,” said the Scarecrow. “You see,” he continued
At first the little creatures, many though they were, could hardly stir
more afraid of you than you are of him.”
While the Woodman was making a ladder from wood which he found in the
looked at Dorothy and her strangely assorted company with wondering
great pile of wood with his axe and Dorothy built a splendid fire that
“Then bring them to me,” she said. And when the tinsmiths came,
purple china dog with an extra-large head, which came to the wall and
“Oh, let us start for the Emerald City tomorrow!”
So, when they were rested, Dorothy picked up her basket and they
Dorothy carried the shoes into the house and placed them on the table.
although he tried to get out of the Woodman’s arms, and would have
children and a man. The man had hurt his leg, and was lying on the
birds and looking at the lovely flowers which now became so thick that
the lovely Lady. And the Tin Woodman saw that his terrible Beast was
“Well,” answered Oz, “if it were inside of you, it would be courage.
odd-looking dwellings, for each was round, with a big dome for a roof.
carefully and wiped them away with the towel. When he had finished, he
you come on an idle or foolish errand to bother the wise reflections of
desert?”
middle of the floor, from which a ladder led down into the small, dark
around and looking at her timidly. But the Scarecrow told her about
He went to a cupboard and reaching up to a high shelf took down a
Woodman and the Scarecrow kept watch over them as usual.
enough from the poppy field to prevent her breathing any more of the
lips, and they were gray also. She was thin and gaunt, and never smiled
at him and broke off all their stings against the tin, without hurting
milkmaid had a nick in her left elbow.
“Well, I’m not sure about Kansas,” said Oz, “for I haven’t the faintest
that stood near and dashed it over the Witch, wetting her from head to
Chapter XV
Chicago, April, 1900.
“What! are you back again?” he asked, in surprise.
The Rescue of the Tin Woodman
She lifted me from the pole in the cornfield and brought me to the
“And she let you go again?” asked the man, in wonder.
“How can I get to her castle?” asked Dorothy.
the cupboard. After he had eaten he would lie down on his bed of straw,
The Lion thought it might be as well to frighten the Wizard, so he gave
“This I hung from the ceiling by a wire,” said Oz. “I stood behind the
to look into the child’s eyes and saw how simple the soul behind them
“Oh, I don’t mind him a bit,” said Dorothy. “But you are so beautiful,”
scampered in all directions, for Toto had awakened from his sleep, and
jumped, he upset a china church with his tail and smashed it all to
dark.”
air. Dorothy felt as if she were going up in a balloon.
The Tin Woodman came to her and said:
one.”
Dorothy lived in the midst of the great Kansas prairies, with Uncle
“You are a wicked creature!” cried Dorothy. “You have no right to take
were dressed in blue, of the same shade as their hats, and wore
I will bear all the unhappiness without a murmur, if you will give me
From the far north they heard a low wail of the wind, and Uncle Henry
rolled over at his feet in two pieces.
wear white.”
Her friends were sorry, but could do nothing to help her; so Dorothy
understand them but himself. When the Tin Woodman walked about he felt
Dorothy leaned her chin upon her hand and gazed thoughtfully at the
green hair and green eyes, and she bowed low before Dorothy as she
it was quite badly rusted the Scarecrow took hold of the tin head and
“We did visit her,” said the Scarecrow.
Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman, not being made of flesh, were not
Now this same morning the Wicked Witch came to the door of her castle
We are so grateful to you for having killed the Wicked Witch of the
growing bigger and bigger at the wonderful sights she saw.
will make her put on mourning; and unless the crops are better this
Oz had said; and Dorothy was surprised to find that the Great Wizard
“And I should never get back to Kansas,” said Dorothy.
the City, the King bowed low to Dorothy, and then flew swiftly away,
“I am now going away to make a visit. While I am gone the Scarecrow
away from him in alarm and tipped over the screen that stood in a
“This is the last time you can summon us,” said the leader to Dorothy;
looks like a bird; and some say he looks like an elephant; and some say
flowers is killing us all. I myself can scarcely keep my eyes open, and
while this fierce creature is alive, and we had called a meeting to
“Why are those needles and pins sticking out of your head?” asked the
her that she nearly became deaf. At first she had wondered if she would
more than ever to get back to Kansas.
night on the grass, with nothing but the stars over them; and they
call, and we shall hear you and come to your assistance. Good-bye!”
scratched against the tin it made a cold shiver run down my back. What
“We shall have to think about that,” replied the little man. “Give me
“That is because you have no brains” answered the girl. “No matter how
there. Dorothy went to get him, and saw such delicious fruit hanging
to ride on the Lion’s back. To their great joy the trees became thinner
“Sit down, my dear; I think I have found the way to get you out of this
my guests, and while you live in the Palace my people will wait upon
Oz gave a low growl at this, but said, gruffly: “If you indeed desire a
“Now,” said the Scarecrow to the Tin Woodman, “you must go to those
demand to see the Great Oz.”
it did not matter now if my axe slipped, for it could not cut me. There
away in every direction as fast as possible.
go.”
been melted by a bucket of water, and Dorothy at once unlocked the gate
“Of course,” answered the girl, “if he will see me.”
“Hello!” replied the Tin Woodman calmly.
“But suppose we cannot?” said the girl.
said to her. “There is no hope for me,” she said sadly, “for Oz will
“I should like something to eat besides fruit,” said the girl, “and I’m
a good drink of the cool, clear water, she set about making ready for
them as they come.”
grew to love her with all my heart. She, on her part, promised to marry
So they oiled his legs until he could move them freely; and he thanked
escape. But they could find no way to get out of the castle, for it was
rule the Winkies wisely and well.”
Chapter II
the Winged Monkeys to you? They will carry you to the City of Oz in
grandfather was flying out with his band when he saw Quelala walking
could find anything to laugh at.
the South and you will soon reach it.”
“I know it,” returned the Lion, wiping a tear from his eye with the tip
The Lion ate some of the porridge, but did not care for it, saying it
“Oz was not such a bad Wizard, after all,” said the Tin Woodman, as he
The next moment it seemed as if she were flying through the air; and
his advice.”
whispered:
so much, for the fall would not hurt me at all.”
The people greeted Dorothy kindly, and invited her to supper and to
great light, as bright as the sun, which made the emeralds sparkle in a
The Council with the Munchkins
wonderful adventures they had met with.
frightened me so badly that my heart is beating yet.”
seeing he was not harmed by me, came to eat the corn too, so in a short
flew away with him to the Witch’s castle, where he was placed in a
“No more than in any other city,” replied Oz; “but when you wear green
What worried her most was that the bread was nearly gone, and another
“It seems, in spite of dangers, that the best thing Dorothy can do is
The Guardian of the Gate
“Here is another space between the trees,” called the Lion.
short, with a little cry of surprise.
therefore the modern child seeks only entertainment in its wonder tales
babies are waiting in the nest for me. I hope you will find the Emerald
covering to protect them from the dew, and the Tin Woodman chopped a
and carried the sleeping girl between them through the flowers.
The Munchkins and the Witch first looked at one another, and then at
The Journey to the Great Oz
then replaced the square of tin, soldering it neatly together where it
one great roar. “Who are you, and why do you seek me?”
modernized fairy tale, in which the wonderment and joy are retained and
always treated them with great cruelty. They kept this day as a
behind. Then the Lion said:
of them could climb down, and for a moment it seemed that their journey
my shoe from me.”
well.”
the people.”
Three were men and one a woman, and all were oddly dressed. They wore
again, thinking I was a Munchkin; and this pleased me and made me feel
“Are you not going to make them your slaves?” asked the leader of the
beast, you know. Besides, Dorothy will need someone to protect her.”
of it.
dried.
them. As they passed over the hill the Hammer-Heads yelled with
in all the Land of Oz—the one who lives in the West.”
Dorothy said nothing. Oz had not kept the promise he made her, but he
“We are all threatened,” answered the tiger, “by a fierce enemy which
companions, and they sat down and looked at her, and Toto found that
with the key.
The little girl, seeing she had lost one of her pretty shoes, grew
and chatted together. Dorothy was once more filled with the hope of
year, and no one has ever heard me before or come to help me.”
him for some brains.”
were drawn out of the current, and then Dorothy took the Tin Woodman’s
Promptly at nine o’clock the next morning the green-whiskered soldier
come to some place.”
solid gold and fitted it to the Woodman’s axe, instead of the old
Chapter XVI
“Take good care of these friends of mine,” said the Lion, “and I will
constantly guarded by the yellow Winkies, who were the slaves of the
“This is a great comfort,” he said. “I have been holding that axe in
heart, you must earn it.”
what we desire. So be of good cheer, my friends, for all will yet be
and pretty rippling brooks with strong bridges across them. The fences
of you, as she has of the rest. But take care; for she is wicked and
She took a little basket and filled it with bread from the cupboard,
She gave some to Toto, and taking a pail from the shelf she carried it
“That must be the Emerald City,” said Dorothy.
Chapter XII
to a whisper. “He is more powerful than all the rest of us together. He
of tin, fastening my tin arms and legs and head to it, by means of
Toward evening, when Dorothy was tired with her long walk and began to
the pole I shall be greatly obliged to you.”
forest Dorothy lay down and slept, for she was tired by the long walk.
stiffly.
City, to ask the Great Oz to send me back to Kansas.”
the old woman, she cleaned and dried it with a cloth, and put it on her
I advise you to drink it as soon as possible.”
paw he sent the Scarecrow spinning over and over to the edge of the
“Oh, yes,” replied Dorothy.
“The princess was angry, and she knew, of course, who did it. She had
Dorothy thought, were about as old as Uncle Henry, for two of them had
smooth, like the surface of a dish, and higher than their heads.
“What are your commands?” inquired the King of the Monkeys, bowing low.
“I might have stood there always if you had not come along,” he said;
she use this Golden Cap, for which reason she did not like to do so
carry you to your forest. Then, having used up the powers of the Golden
brook, and soon after they all started toward the Emerald City.
could help her get to Kansas again, so she bravely resolved not to turn
ground with a great clatter.
There were several roads nearby, but it did not take her long to find
and green the moss is that clings to these old trees. Surely no wild
and afterward drive Oz himself out of the Land of the West. Now the
“Oh, yes; but one is never so pretty after being mended, you know,”
grant your wish. Now go, and do not seek me again until you have earned
“I am everywhere,” answered the Voice, “but to the eyes of common
tail to show he knew what she meant.
after a long and tiresome walk through the underbrush they entered
left as far as they could see; and, besides, they did not dare change
“Where are you all going?”
So they all lay upon the ground except the Scarecrow, and he stood up
not doing these little people more harm than breaking a cow’s leg and a
could see was a mass of towers and steeples behind the green walls, and
and a wrinkled face, who seemed to be as much surprised as they were.
when it faces danger. The True courage is in facing danger when you are
It was nearly as big as an elephant, and the green throne seemed hardly
“I want you to fly with me to Kansas,” said Dorothy.
themselves, they would surely have destroyed me. As it was, I lived in
her, while the Lion guarded the door of her room so she might not be
“Come back!” she screamed. “I want to go, too!”
were several patches on him, but the tinsmiths did a good job, and as
“Oh,” said Dorothy, “I’m awfully sorry for you.”
to keep him from stumbling; and to the Tin Woodman they offered a
“Thank you,” said Dorothy gratefully. “You are all very kind to me. But
The cyclone had set the house down very gently—for a cyclone—in the
was going on. There was another Munchkin with him, and the first thing
“That is where the Good Witch of the North kissed me when she bade me
really cannot be called courage until you have swallowed it. Therefore
Dorothy could stand no longer. Her eyes closed in spite of herself and
they were afraid of me, and promised to do anything I wished them to.
it a kind heart?”
the Scarecrow brains.”
a broad river, flowing swiftly just before them. On the other side of
It was a very tall tree, and the trunk was so smooth that no one could
are out of the forest?”
that Dorothy feared it would burst.
bitten him had he not known very well he was made of tin. Finally one
This book is dedicated to my good friend & comrade
and kettles and sweep the floor and keep the fire fed with wood.
would do next. Without stopping an instant the fierce beasts also began
coarse black hair. It had a great mouth, with a row of sharp teeth a
better man than some of them. Brains are the only things worth having
corner of the house. “There are her two feet, still sticking out from
sniffed at it as if he did not like it, the Wizard said:
big pile of wood, and now he made a fire of it, and Oz held the bottom
be helped.”
country. There were milkmaids and shepherdesses, with brightly colored
heart, you know, so I am careful to help all those who may need a
The three Munchkins bowed low to her and wished her a pleasant journey,
wishes upon us.”
him. Indeed, the Tin Woodman began to cry, but fortunately remembered
Toto looked up into her face with his little black eyes and wagged his
“They really are,” said the Lion, “but that doesn’t make me any braver,
the big throne and the others stood respectfully before him.
Dorothy told the Witch all her story: how the cyclone had brought her
bowing before the little girl. “What do you wish?”
This adventure made the travelers more anxious than ever to get out of
and buttercups. Dorothy still wore the pretty silk dress she had put on
And, so far as they knew, they were quite right.
across the desert will be through the air. Now, it is quite beyond my
So the big bird flew into the air and over the water till she came to
“I am—I certainly am,” answered the little man sorrowfully; “but it was
and she felt she must sit down to rest and to sleep.
“Then send for them all to come here as soon as possible, and let each
race of queer men who do not like strangers to cross their country. For
at it so fiercely that he cut it in two. At once the tree began shaking
beautiful Castle. Before the gates were three young girls, dressed in
“Can’t you get down?” asked Dorothy.
“Where did you get the silver shoes?”
discovered it to be a kinder and more tender heart than the one he had
the Wizard was riding in the basket, rising every moment farther and
so I also will go with her to the Land of the South.”
The woman now called to them that supper was ready, so they gathered
return. In this country everyone must pay for everything he gets. If
Evil. All we can do is to carry her to the castle of the Wicked Witch
“Perhaps I have, but I’m scared just the same,” said the Lion. “I shall
creatures more than three times. Twice already the Wicked Witch had
Next morning the Scarecrow said to his friends:
“Truly I should be ungrateful if I failed to mourn for the man who gave
the Yellow Castle again, Dorothy shedding a few tears by the way at the
declared he could see as well as by day. So she took hold of his arm
and well. But to those who are not honest, or who approach him from
So the Lion aroused himself and bounded forward as fast as he could go.
Now the Wicked Witch of the West had but one eye, yet that was as
man could turn it himself.
After a time the ladder was finished. It looked clumsy, but the Tin
“Am I really wonderful?” asked the Scarecrow.
been painted yellow in the country of the Winkies and blue in the
brains than he needs.”
was soon chopped nearly through. Then the Lion put his strong front
As the Monkey King finished his story Dorothy looked down and saw the
Great Oz dwelt.
branches of a tall tree.
but if you will come to me tomorrow morning, I will stuff your head
When you came to me, I was willing to promise anything if you would
was, and that the little girl did not know of the wonderful power the
face and over the hinges of his jaw, and there they rusted. When
of the country that the Kalidahs lived.
saw hundreds of the armless Hammer-Heads upon the hillside, one behind
“Just to amuse myself, and keep the good people busy, I ordered them to
her breakfast. She saw there was not much bread left in the basket, and
“You must have been thinking again,” remarked the Tin Woodman.
hard task; for the Great Wizard does not like to see anyone, and he
considerably cracked in his head, and that makes him foolish.”
flowers were too strong for me. How did you get me out?”
But the Scarecrow said, “This is my battle, so lie down beside me and
the bars of the gate, “I can starve you. You shall have nothing to eat
everything, and was glad to get a good supper again.
the people were laughing and singing, while a big table near by was
the hard, yellow road-bed. The sun shone bright and the birds sang
Oz, “I tired of that, and became a balloonist.”
mishap, and giving a loud roar that echoed like thunder, he dashed up
away the old one. Uncle Henry was milking the cows in the barnyard, and
you to the gates of the Emerald City,” said Glinda, “for it would be a
“Won’t they hurt me?” asked the girl anxiously.
“There is only one thing in the world I am afraid of.”
Then Dorothy lost heart. She sat down on the grass and looked at her
and sat down. There was a great cornfield beyond the fence, and not far
would need the oil-can badly.”
The remaining Monkeys threw pieces of stout rope around the Lion and
silver oil-can, inlaid with gold and set with precious jewels.
“Or I my brains?” wailed the Scarecrow, wiping the tears from his eyes
china fences around them; and many cows and sheep and horses and pigs
the Winkies, and gave them sharp spears, telling them to go to the
Dorothy wept bitterly at the passing of her hope to get home to Kansas
friends.
Cap, I shall give it to the King of the Monkeys, that he and his band
of the first things he did was to paint my ears, so that I heard what
“Well,” said the girl, “let us go.” And she handed the basket to the
“Very well, I will give you that sort of courage tomorrow,” replied Oz.
of her dress. And so, with Toto trotting along soberly behind her, she
all its branches as if in pain, and the Tin Woodman passed safely under
these houses during the afternoon, and sometimes people came to the
Contents
eating her bread.
“Oh, yes; there are thousands,” she replied.
branches immediately seized him and tossed him back again.
around the stuffed man as if he suspected there might be a nest of rats
“Yes,” answered the tin man, “I did. I’ve been groaning for more than a
was a good fight, friend.”
much too heavy to lift. We must leave him here to sleep on forever, and
The eyes winked three times, and then they turned up to the ceiling and
and the house shook so hard that she lost her footing and sat down
King of the Forest?” inquired the Lion.
“Hush, my dear,” he said. “Don’t speak so loud, or you will be
The King bowed low before Dorothy, and asked, “What is your command?”
Oz.
“And I want him to give me a heart,” said the Tin Woodman.
the mud at the bottom of the river. Then, before he could pull it out
came a deep growl from some wild animal hidden among the trees. These
to push the raft through the water.
Witch earnestly for her kindness; and Dorothy exclaimed:
“That is proof that he is sharp,” remarked the Lion.
china, even to their clothes, and were so small that the tallest of
“Then you must go to the City of Emeralds. Perhaps Oz will help you.”
“Very well,” answered Oz meekly. “Come to me tomorrow and you shall
“Well, I’ll try,” said the Stork, “but if I find he is too heavy to
great assemblage hushed as if by magic. The biggest of the tigers came
“I cannot think why this wall is here, nor what it is made of.”
“Come in,” said Oz.
little girl.
bear a powerful charm. There is now but one Wicked Witch left in all
surprise.
“What shall we do?” asked Dorothy despairingly.
edge of the gulf and crouched down.
Now the Scarecrow, who had expected to see the great Head Dorothy had
“Didn’t you know water would be the end of me?” asked the Witch, in a
“City life does not agree with me at all,” remarked the Lion, as they
“Don’t you suppose we could rescue them?” asked the girl anxiously.
Scarecrow. Its head was a small sack stuffed with straw, with eyes,
Toto did not like this addition to the party at first. He smelled
Woodman.
would make him her husband, so she took him to her ruby palace and used
make one happy, and happiness is the best thing in the world.”
horses were kept.
go.”
they carry you safely to the land of the Winkies. Your brain may not be
“My dress is blue and white checked,” said Dorothy, smoothing out the
Chapter VII. The Journey to the Great Oz
might rest until the Great Oz was ready to receive them.
held Toto tightly lest he should run after her and frighten her.
and started upon their journey.
if you will kindly wipe away my tears, so that I shall not rust.”
thought the Scarecrow said:
There is no place like home.”
long as I have my oil-can, and nothing can hurt the Scarecrow, while
“Or give me a heart,” said the Tin Woodman.
The Clown put his hands in his pockets, and after puffing out his
This worried Dorothy a little, but she knew that only the Great Oz
The house whirled around two or three times and rose slowly through the
“Not a bit of it, my dear; I’m just a common man.”
when you have it you can command the Winged Monkeys three times.”
looked sharply at the queer party.
So the soldier was summoned and entered the Throne Room timidly, for
want, child, and why is that great Lion with you?”
have had it at your backs all this time.” Then she noticed Dorothy’s
Scarecrow fell off the wall and the others jumped down upon him so that
many miles. There were four walls, a floor and a roof, which made one
Straightway a great flock of wild crows came flying toward her, enough
Munchkins in the land, and his friends were gathered with him to
the morning; and Dorothy dreamed of the Emerald City, and of the good
“No, for this pole is stuck up my back. If you will please take away
sides out. As for the Ball of Fire, the false Wizard had hung that also
She was within a few steps of it, and Oz was holding out his hands to
off upon the pretty green grass, and they also knew that the stream had
“If we walk far enough,” said Dorothy, “I am sure we shall sometime
ever; but I little knew how cruel my enemy could be. She thought of a
last, he came back, Dorothy asked:
straight ahead, and so stepped into the holes and fell at full length
wall, and Dorothy put her head over and cried, “Oh, my!” just as the
to a big building, exactly in the middle of the City, which was the
Princess, who stopped short as she saw the strangers and started to run
cheeks and nodding his head at them saucily, he said:
whisked his tail from side to side in pure joy at being in the country
“Why, as for that,” answered Oz, “I think you are wrong to want a
Dorothy ran down and helped the Scarecrow to his feet, and the Lion
When the Wicked Witch looked out again and saw all her crows lying in a
able to raise large crops. Once in a while she would pass a house, and
daisies than it was being carried. They knew, of course, they must go
Chapter IX
“They are the Kalidahs!” said the Cowardly Lion, beginning to tremble.
but he let them in at once, and they were again met by the beautiful
“That was too bad,” said Dorothy, “but really I think we were lucky in
“Because you wear silver shoes and have killed the Wicked Witch.
see what would happen.
big head tenderly. Then she kissed the Tin Woodman, who was weeping in
The great spider was lying asleep when the Lion found him, and it
the ripe corn.
good things to eat, and fastened a little bell around Toto’s neck with
rocks at the bottom.
So the Wicked Witch took the Golden Cap from her cupboard and placed it
She closed the door, locked it, and put the key carefully in the pocket
and said:
country of the Munchkins blue was the favorite color. But the people do
glances over her shoulder at the clumsy strangers, holding her nicked
“Your commands shall be obeyed,” said the leader. Then, with a great
came up to her, feeling rather bruised and sore, and said, “It is
“Don’t mind Mr. Joker,” said the Princess to Dorothy. “He is
“The Witch of the South. She is the most powerful of all the Witches,
“Who are you?” asked the Scarecrow when he had stretched himself and
“Rest your brains and do not worry about the wall,” replied the
here was the Scarecrow, as good as ever, thanking them over and over
City and that Oz will help you.”
“I can’t find Toto anywhere,” replied Dorothy, who did not wish to
Then I thought, as the country was so green and beautiful, I would call
green pictures that made her laugh, they were so funny.
“After the crows had gone I thought this over, and decided I would try
dish, beautifully carved. Placing this before the Cowardly Lion, who
“Willingly!” exclaimed Dorothy; “indeed, it is of no use to me now, and
Once Toto got too near the open trap door, and fell in; and at first
come to the end of the woods and reach the bright sunshine again. To
sticking out, shod in silver shoes with pointed toes.
whimpered a little, but none of the others was frightened, and they
“Why do you wish to see the terrible Oz?” asked the man.
was rusted and the handle broken off short.
thing. This made the Tin Woodman very unhappy, for he was always
“I haven’t the heart to harm even a Witch,” remarked the Tin Woodman;
Quadlings.
dog, with long silky hair and small black eyes that twinkled merrily on
“Very well,” she answered, and putting on the Golden Cap she uttered
And with another bow, the Monkey King spread his wings and flew away
were so frightened that they ran back as fast as they could.
“That may all be true,” said the Scarecrow, “but I shall be very
Dorothy looked inside the Golden Cap and saw some words written upon
love. I pray you to give me a heart that I may be as other men are.”
others in the natural history, and for a moment Dorothy was afraid. But
As they walked on, the green glow became brighter and brighter, and it
the other animals in the forest naturally expect me to be brave, for
of the Great Oz.
Toto did not like it. He ran about the room, now here, now there,
“Won’t you tell me a story, while we are resting?” asked the child.
them.”
anyone who is our friend. If you will help us to save him I promise
You know, of course, that courage is always inside one; so that this
them again and again for his release, for he seemed a very polite
It was very dark, and the wind howled horribly around her, but Dorothy
Chapter XXIV. Home Again
have not killed anything.”
where he gave her a room with a pretty bed in it. The sheets were made
where the Lion lay asleep.
“Why not?”
shore. It was hard work, although he was so big; but by and by they
use her power.” Then she said to Dorothy, harshly and severely:
Just then a bell rang, and the green girl said to Dorothy, “That is the
they all sat down for a few moments to give the beast a chance to rest,
strange people. Her tears seemed to grieve the kind-hearted Munchkins,
angry, and said to the Witch, “Give me back my shoe!”
a green ribbon.
ever lived, if not braver,” said the Lion modestly.
that I was quite an important person. By and by an old crow flew near
“I never killed anything, willingly,” she sobbed. “Even if I wanted to,
They walked along listening to the singing of the brightly colored
brains in your head you would be as good a man as any of them, and a
Aunt Em dropped her work and came to the door. One glance told her of
Dorothy listened to this speech with wonder. What could the little
worked for three days and four nights, hammering and twisting and
“Good gracious!” exclaimed the man, and he bowed very low indeed before
After an hour or so the light faded away, and they found themselves
was not a Head, as she had seen him, but a lovely Lady.
walking was not at all good.
minute he was raised from the ground and flung headlong among his
“And I shall get my brains,” added the Scarecrow joyfully.
rose into the air without her.
the rapid flight of the Monkeys, but was glad the journey was over. The
So Dorothy said good-bye to all her friends except Toto, and taking the
she made up her mind to wear it and carry her sunbonnet in the basket.
best to be done, and now he asked the Woodman to chop away the end of
wound many coils about his body and head and legs, until he was unable
forest, and all the beasts that live there have made me their King. If
“My life has been so short that I really know nothing whatever. I was
we must stop where we are.”
walked with them as far as the gate. When the Guardian of the Gate saw
up and noticed that the house was not moving; nor was it dark, for the
“Quick!” cried the Scarecrow. “Let us cross over.”
upon the other end to steady it, and they had long poles in their hands
open country where there is plenty of sunshine. But now and then there
they paid for it with green pennies.
“It was Dorothy,” said the Lion gravely.
Woodman and Toto were sitting.
time there was a great flock of them about me.
Dorothy reached up both arms and lifted the figure off the pole, for,
quite satisfied with my lot.”
“He says so himself,” answered the Scarecrow, “and he would never hurt
every rock.
The Discovery of Oz, the Terrible
Chapter XVII
Golden Cap is yours, and three times you have the right to lay your
Others of the Monkeys caught the Scarecrow, and with their long fingers
were tigers and elephants and bears and wolves and foxes and all the
to get into new trouble. But he at once unlocked their spectacles,
“They are the people who live in this land of the East where the Wicked
It was not such an awful voice as she had expected to come from the big
“I have come for my courage,” announced the Lion, entering the room.
country. This made her angrier than before, and she blew her silver
Again a head shot swiftly out, and the great Lion went rolling down the
continued the Scarecrow, “we might all be happy together.”
the sky.
green banks, and murmuring in a voice very grateful to a little girl
ever destroyed her before, so I naturally thought she would make slaves
about the charm of the Golden Cap, but she saw that it was pretty, so
“I am a Woodman, and made of tin. Therefore I have no heart, and cannot
“Why, that isn’t very far from Kansas!” cried Dorothy.
“For my part, I am content in knowing I am as brave as any beast that
and I come to you praying that you will put brains in my head instead
is that little animal you are so tender of?”
bending and soldering and polishing and pounding at the legs and body
seeing all these mice around him he gave one bark of delight and jumped
he looks like a cat. To others he appears as a beautiful fairy, or a
carry I shall have to drop him in the river again.”
“At the East, not far from here,” said one, “there is a great desert,
“he was the first to lay his wishes upon us. As his bride could not
spectacles on all the people, so that everything they saw was green.”
think her a witch, and she knew very well she was only an ordinary
to light on his head and get the pins in their feet. When all were
corner of the house where the Wicked Witch had been lying.
sweetly, and Dorothy did not feel nearly so bad as you might think a
with hesitation, “You are very kind, but there must be some mistake. I
were quite as long as the tiger had said, and its body covered with
anyone who breathes it falls asleep, and if the sleeper is not carried
near the top of the great dome, and it said:
Both Dorothy and the Scarecrow had been greatly interested in the story
this land, and when you can tell me she is dead I will send you back to
“Oh, thank you! Thank you ever so much for saving my life.”
couch in a corner. They seemed greatly surprised to see so strange a
time to reach the Emerald City, I shall never get my brains.”
The Scarecrow was now the ruler of the Emerald City, and although he
For she was sitting on the broad Kansas prairie, and just before her
certainly afraid, turned to face the Kalidahs, and then he gave so loud
they passed on through the gate into the Emerald City. When the people
out.”
rare and brilliant plumage sang and fluttered in the trees and bushes.
witch.”
Dorothy had only one other dress, but that happened to be clean and was
together, we will begin to work on our balloon.”
“Because you are strong and I am weak; because you are a Great Wizard
“I got them from the Wicked Witch of the East, when my house fell on
“Oh, yes; I am anxious,” returned the Scarecrow. “It is such an
remained all night staring at a little spider which was weaving its web
Of course each one of them expected to see the Wizard in the shape he
“Never. He sits day after day in the great Throne Room of his Palace,
“Just as easily as he could give me brains,” said the Scarecrow.
The Lion became quite angry at the laughter caused by the Scarecrow’s
Dorothy did not know this, nor could she get away from the bright red
So the Woodman raised his axe, and as the Wildcat ran by he gave it a
often that he is mended in a hundred places, and doesn’t look at all
“You people with hearts,” he said, “have something to guide you, and
falling off. When he got his head over the top of the wall the
“We have surely lost our way,” he said, “and unless we find it again in
heap, she got into a terrible rage, and blew three times upon her
air should get cold the balloon would come down in the desert, and we
“I also,” said the Tin Woodman, “am well-pleased with my new heart;
Dorothy, fearing Toto would be killed, and heedless of danger, rushed
Introduction
get thrown about.” He walked up to another tree, as he spoke, but its
Chapter XX
So he led the way and the others followed. They had nearly reached the
harm it. The Tin Woodman knew very well he had no heart, and therefore
“It is exactly in the center of the country, and is ruled by Oz, the
“Yes,” answered the child, looking up and drying her tears.
Dorothy was puzzled at this, for it sounded queer to hear a stuffed man
scarcely wait till I get to Oz, and you must admit this is a very long
“Yes, indeed,” answered the little woman. “But I am a good witch, and
Chapter XIX
you will not be harmed.”
The four travelers passed through the rest of the forest in safety, and
alive.”
easy to make the Scarecrow and the Lion and the Woodman happy, because
again.”
When he saw Dorothy and her companions the man asked, “What do you wish
roughly. When a big branch bent down to seize him the Woodman chopped
joints, so that I could move around as well as ever. But, alas! I had
“Good day,” said the Scarecrow, in a rather husky voice.
reach the Winged Monkeys, which carried Dorothy and her comrades safely
by carefully picking their way, they got safely along until they
stop to rest, and so climbed to the top of the fence beside the road
Scarecrow, but he refused.
“Step inside,” answered the soldier, “and I will carry your message to
“I thought I had beaten the Wicked Witch then, and I worked harder than
to start. Dorothy sat down in the middle of the raft and held Toto in
people dance.
The Cyclone
sent word for them to come to the Throne Room at four minutes after
but they saw that no harm was intended, so they rode through the air
often with the tip of his tail that it became quite wet, and he was
at once, but he did not. They had no word from him the next day, nor
whistle twice.
“Quick, Dorothy!” she screamed. “Run for the cellar!”
At length, however, she sat up and looked about her.
killed the Wicked Witch of the East? Dorothy was an innocent, harmless
answered, “and we stopped at your cottage to pass the night.”
and showing plainly that he had been mended in many places.
It was true; Toto had fallen down beside his little mistress. But the
side. It was a very wide ditch, and when they crept up to the edge and
near the Emerald City.”
other travelers had come back again, after destroying the Wicked Witch;
as many as he put in the basket. But the Scarecrow did not mind how
“There’s a cyclone coming, Em,” he called to his wife. “I’ll go look
sent the Winged Monkeys to bring them to her. It was much harder to
“Ziz-zy, zuz-zy, zik!”
Chapter XI. The Emerald City of Oz
brains at all,” he answered sadly.
“How shall we cross the river?” asked Dorothy.
both of them cried, “Oh, my!” as soon as they looked over the wall.
go to the land of the Winkies, seek out the Wicked Witch, and destroy
Dorothy was shocked to see that the cow had broken her leg off, and
“And I should get no heart,” said the Tin Woodman.
nothing but a lot of skins, sewn together, with slats to keep their
the Castle, where Dorothy washed her face and combed her hair, and the
“Hil-lo, hol-lo, hel-lo!”
Scarecrow to rule over us.”
The Tin Woodman gave a sigh of satisfaction and lowered his axe, which
“We cannot be far from the road of yellow brick, now,” remarked the
“I shall take the heart,” returned the Tin Woodman; “for brains do not
“I wonder if they will fit me,” she said to Toto. “They would be just
wonderful place; but I have never been permitted to see the Great Oz,
carried them. It was a lovely country, with plenty of flowers and fruit
“How shall we get down?” asked Dorothy.
threatened to beat her with the same old umbrella she always carried in
said:
“He isn’t heavy a bit,” said Dorothy eagerly, “for he is stuffed with
“Why?” asked the girl.
the river, and at last came upon their friend the Lion, lying fast
that the Witch is Wicked—tremendously Wicked—and ought to be killed.
Witch of the West, they all gathered around the travelers and followed
forward and slapped the Lion upon his nose as hard as she could, while
was true enough.
will bestow upon you a great many brains, and such good brains that you
Do let me carry that basket for you. I shall not mind it, for I can’t
fearsome moral to each tale. Modern education includes morality;
the Great Oz himself, and driven him out of the land of the West. The
beards. But the little woman was doubtless much older. Her face was
“I will make a ladder,” said the Tin Woodman, “for we certainly must
“Oh! He’s a curious animal and seems remarkably small, now that I look
She had such a frightened little voice that Dorothy stopped and said,
slaves, and set herself to rule over their country. The Winged Monkeys
through the forest he seizes an animal with a leg and drags it to his
When Boq saw her silver shoes he said, “You must be a great sorceress.”
way to Kansas.
Then Dorothy and the Lion got up, and the girl helped the Tin Woodman
“Oz keeps a great pot of courage in his Throne Room,” said the man,
fresh air again, instead of the poisonous scent of the flowers.
tall, rank grass. It was difficult to walk without falling into muddy
the stake, and from what you say I am sure the Great Oz will give me
Instantly she was whirling through the air, so swiftly that all she
might have stood and rusted in the forest till the end of the world.”
course that is all that is expected of us when we are on mantels and
“Let us call in the soldier with the green whiskers,” he said, “and ask
spectacles of every size and shape. All of them had green glasses in
“To see the Good Witch who rules here,” she answered. “Will you take me
at all, and, seeing this, the Scarecrow did not fear that so helpless a
this room, and when they were seated he said politely:
was a long journey through a dangerous country, although nearer to the
who had been standing silently by, gave a loud shout and pointed to the
keep away the other wild beasts. It seems to me they must be more
The bees came and found no one but the Woodman to sting, so they flew
“Oh, dear! Oh, dear!” cried Dorothy, clasping her hands together in
mane, while they talked of their troubles and tried to plan some way to
them again he wondered greatly that they could leave the beautiful City
are now.”
“Yes,” she answered, “I melted her with a bucket of water.”
“Because of all Wizards you are the greatest, and alone have power to
The Scarecrow sighed.
“True,” answered Oz. “But there is another way to make it float, which
shut the gate again.
were greatly pleased to see this delightful country before them.
judged by their snarling and growling that they were in great trouble.
the lining. These, she thought, must be the charm, so she read the
nothing but the great gray prairie on every side. Not a tree nor a
wonderful rooms in the world. The Tin Woodman lay down on his bed from
“I shall be glad to have your company,” said Dorothy.
for the place where it would be easiest to get into the forest.
three times and command the shoes to carry you wherever you wish to
barked at them in a tiny voice, afterwards running away again.
thoughtfully, “for you must sleep, and eat and drink. However, you have
and her eyes upon the ground. Then she looked up and said, “I do not
“Run fast,” said the Scarecrow to the Lion, “and get out of this deadly
pulled all of the straw out of his clothes and head. They made his hat
it is we never knew.”
screen and pulled a thread, to make the eyes move and the mouth open.”
his great box, and then he politely opened the gate for our friends.
Chapter XVIII. Away to the South
the sun sets, and you cannot fail to find her.”
although the Woodman fell over in the road and lay still.
was when I heard your house had fallen on the Wicked Witch of the East.
could not take them off had she wished, but of course she did not wish
they remembered how badly the Winged Monkeys had treated them before;
locks a crown of jewels. Growing from her shoulders were wings,
the Golden Cap; but if she could only get hold of the Silver Shoes,
has lately come into this forest. It is a most tremendous monster, like
my cottage and took care to oil myself whenever I needed it. However,
another corner. There was no garret at all, and no cellar—except a
walked to the Throne Room and knocked at the door.
the girl was thankful the Scarecrow did not have to eat anything, for
and chopped so well that soon he cleared a passage for the entire
“Send me back to Kansas, where my Aunt Em and Uncle Henry are,” she
should be lost.”
farther. Dorothy and Toto and the Lion lay down to sleep, while the
Presently they heard a solemn Voice, that seemed to come from somewhere
being such a humbug.”
dented on the rocks below. But if I am on your back it will not matter
how to keep young in spite of the many years she has lived.”
days at the Yellow Castle, where they found everything they needed to
to do all in their power for Dorothy, who had set them free from
“See what you have done!” she screamed. “In a minute I shall melt
no trouble to make the balloon. But in all this country there is no gas
and looked everywhere to see where she was. “After a time,” continued
“How far is it to the Emerald City?” the girl asked.
Guardian of the Gates they had met before.
hoped it would be the lovely Lady. “For,” he said to himself, “if it is
In the morning they traveled on until they came to a thick wood. There
The Dainty China Country
that flew past his head. So he put out his tongue and panted and looked
land.
green color and was as white as Dorothy’s dress.
So, while they were walking through the forest, the Tin Woodman told
“The Silver Shoes,” said the Good Witch, “have wonderful powers. And
“And I am going to ask him to give me a heart,” said the Woodman.
Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman and the Lion exactly what they thought
and wind had changed her, too. They had taken the sparkle from her eyes
at last asked the green girl to take another message to Oz, saying if
water’s edge.
the Woodman nor the Scarecrow ever ate anything, but she was not made
“Be quiet, sir!” said the Princess. “Can’t you see these are strangers,
proves you have a heart. For my part, I have no heart; so I cannot have
stumbling along in the darkness. Dorothy could not see at all, but Toto
with him. But it is a long way to the Emerald City, and it will take
started along the grassy bank, to the road from which the river had
and studded everywhere with sparkling emeralds. They walked over a
Then, being prepared for the journey, they all started for the Emerald
the house raised it up higher and higher, until it was at the very top
and I am only a little girl.”
So the Scarecrow climbed farther up and sat down on the top of the
every night, while the woman was asleep, Dorothy carried him food from
“Help Dorothy to kill the Wicked Witch of the West,” replied the Beast.
must be a very uncomfortable thing not to be alive. Those creatures
brains, and a heart also; so, having tried them both, I should much
oiled the Woodman’s jaws, so that after a few moments he could talk as
Dorothy looked at her in wonder, the Witch began to shrink and fall
I should like to start as soon as possible.”
“We wish to pass the night with you, if you will allow us,” answered
and untilled. Toward evening they came to a great forest, where the
corner and waited patiently until morning came.
may thereafter be free for evermore.”
“Very likely. Well, Oz can do anything; so I suppose he will find
“Oz himself is the Great Wizard,” answered the Witch, sinking her voice
All this time Dorothy and her companions had been walking through the
the pail, and even the milkmaid herself, and all fell on the china
and one other time when the house tipped badly, she felt as if she were
the West, who would make you her slave if you passed her way.”
joints would not be rusted. At the same time her own tears fell thick
how could I kill the Wicked Witch? If you, who are Great and Terrible,
on Dorothy’s forehead, for she knew well that neither the Winged
were locked together by a little key that was at the end of a chain the
sometimes pleasant and sometimes dark and terrible. However, I will use
green brocaded satin. Dorothy put on a green silk apron and tied a
“We must go and search for water,” she said to him.
flew into the cornfield, but as soon as they saw me they flew away
He bade his comrades good-bye and marched proudly away to do battle
the Lion were tired, and lay down upon the grass and fell asleep, with
riverbank a tree full of fine fruit. This pleased Dorothy, who had
floor she stumbled over the bar, not being able to see it, and fell at
“Have you any?” inquired the Scarecrow.
snarling brutes with it, and both were dashed to pieces on the sharp
“And I shall never have brains,” added the Scarecrow.
ever seen. They were not as big as the grown folk she had always been
your party, I will also go to the Emerald City and ask Oz to help me.”
stood perfectly motionless, as if he could not stir at all.
The four travelers passed a sleepless night, each thinking of the gift
Now the charm began to work. The sky was darkened, and a low rumbling
Hour after hour passed away, and slowly Dorothy got over her fright;
the ground. “I feel like a new man.”
noise, flew into the air and were soon out of sight.
I didn’t know what a mouth was for. I had the fun of watching them make
She took off her old leather shoes and tried on the silver ones, which
yellow brick, she was startled to hear a deep groan near by.
“Did you speak?” asked the girl, in wonder.
her friends were walking. But the Woodman had seen them coming, and the
“I will not,” retorted the Witch, “for it is now my shoe, and not
cornfield, and that now I am the ruler of this beautiful City, I am
you see, the Land of Oz has never been civilized, for we are cut off
to Kansas, and if he did she was willing to forgive him everything.
“Here are strangers,” said the Guardian of the Gates to him, “and they
once more.”
coward like me,” continued the Lion sadly.
I suppose there is nothing to do but try it. So get on my back and we
treated Quelala, and dropped in the river. But my grandfather pleaded
good friends.
They now turned and took a last look at the Emerald City. All they
“‘They aren’t straight,’” answered the other.
loving comrades.
stood beside her.
“Nothing that I know of,” answered the Woodman; but the Scarecrow, who
The Scarecrow was thinking again, and his head bulged out so horribly
creature could prevent them from climbing the hill. So he said, “I’m
at once he could not leap across it.
When Dorothy was left alone she began to feel hungry. So she went to
Scarecrow waked Dorothy and the Lion and Toto, and told them that the
“But you were strong enough to kill the Wicked Witch of the East,” said
last, I felt very proud, for I thought I was just as good a man as
In spite of the swaying of the house and the wailing of the wind,
“And you promised to give me a heart,” said the Tin Woodman.
rose into the air and were out of sight in a twinkling.
Little Toto, now that he had an enemy to face, ran barking toward the
the grass to let the sun dry him.
to the Lion’s surprise, he could make no impression on the tin,
I came to this country it was in a balloon. You also came through the
is not another city in all the world that is ruled by a stuffed man.”
bodices and golden spots all over their gowns; and princesses with most
a large, loud roar, which was so fierce and dreadful that Toto jumped
“If he is a Beast when I go to see him, I shall roar my loudest, and so
“Over the hill of the Hammer-Heads,” he answered, “lies a grand old
her; so I set to work harder than ever. But the girl lived with an old
coward.”
“Aren’t they beautiful?” the girl asked, as she breathed in the spicy
were lying in heaps and drying up, and she had used up all the power of
kind and thoughtful of the Scarecrow, but she laughed heartily at the
roared at him, and he has always run away as fast as he could go. If
Head; so she took courage and answered:
people to call me a fool, and if my head stays stuffed with straw
Indeed, a jolly little clown came walking toward them, and Dorothy
joke better than a good dinner. One day, just before the wedding, my
directions carefully and put the Cap upon her head.
When she had tired watching the dancing, Boq led her into the house,
green lemonade, and when the children bought it Dorothy could see that
The Scarecrow, who was in the lead, finally discovered a big tree with
into me, it doesn’t matter, for I can’t feel it. But I do not want
many big, jagged rocks at the bottom. The sides were so steep that none
one bring a long piece of string.”
they were quite sure which way they were going.
was left to stand in the woods until you came to help me. It was a
axe slip again, so that it cut right through my body, splitting me into
Dorothy asked, “Where are you?”
edge of the Tin Woodman’s weapon. There were forty wolves, and forty
the wink of an eye. All you have to do is to knock the heels together
ground.
Dorothy looked at him in amazement, and so did the Scarecrow, while
And that was the last any of them ever saw of Oz, the Wonderful Wizard,
“Isn’t it a beauty?” he asked.
could not do very well as a wood-chopper. So I went to a tinsmith and
to fill the balloon with, to make it float.”
companions. When the little girl saw them coming she was afraid.
all a good dinner, with three kinds of cake and four kinds of cookies,
looked into it they could see it was also very deep, and there were
flowers that surrounded them would never end. They followed the bend of
little girl was unhappy, and that made him unhappy too.
“Do you think Oz could give me courage?” asked the Cowardly Lion.
“But we must have a basket to ride in,” he said. So he sent the soldier
her.
“It seems gloomy,” said the Scarecrow.
to use his axe at once, and, just as the two Kalidahs were nearly
have any brains, after all!”
water has spotted your clothes.’ Quelala was much too wise not to swim,
He seized his axe, which he had made very sharp, and as the leader of
plums from the trees beside the river. Behind them was the dark forest
high as Dorothy’s waist. There were also pretty little barns, with
Palace. It was the sweetest little room in the world, with a soft
looked around her. There was the Scarecrow, still standing patiently in
A little way off was a small brook, rushing and sparkling along between
that out for yourself.”
did not know what joy was. He was gray also, from his long beard to his
The Lion now walked to the Throne Room and knocked at the door.
uncomfortable feeling to know one is a fool.”
They waited until Dorothy awoke the next morning. The little girl was
hopped down at my feet and ate all the corn he wanted. The other birds,
The morning after the balloon had gone up with Oz, the four travelers
strong enough to hold its weight. The Beast had a head like that of a
the poor Scarecrow, they could have been very happy.
“When shall we start?” asked the Scarecrow.
loaded with delicious fruits and nuts, pies and cakes, and many other
rescue their friends, and the Winkies said that they would be delighted
“Let us make a chair with our hands and carry her,” said the Scarecrow.
backward, while even the fierce beasts stopped short and looked at him
of his tail. “It is my great sorrow, and makes my life very unhappy.
“If I only had a heart, I should love them,” added the Tin Woodman.
the journey to the City of Emeralds.
all the magic arts I know of to keep you from harm.”
something for me first. Help me and I will help you.”
first the Witch was tempted to run away from Dorothy; but she happened
fruits. Banks of gorgeous flowers were on every hand, and birds with
full of hope, and Dorothy breakfasted like a princess off peaches and
“How?” asked Dorothy.
for my heart.”
greensward all about, with stately trees bearing rich and luscious
“You are now our ruler,” he said to the Scarecrow; “so you must come
waiting for him and said proudly:
Chapter VI.  The Cowardly Lion
“Are you really going to look upon the face of Oz the Terrible?”
stupidly in one spot, just within the doorway, to wait till morning. It
“We shall go tomorrow morning,” returned the Scarecrow. “So now let us
“Don’t chase me! Don’t chase me!”
nor do I know of any living person who has seen him.”
“Yonder, among the oak trees,” said the tiger, pointing with his
that is needed to make one happy. I have been good to the people, and
“How long will it be,” the child asked of the Tin Woodman, “before we
will have to live with us.”
his tail. Then the Lion began to swim with all his might toward the
of the Great Oz.
All were painted blue, for in this country of the East blue was the
in a solemn voice. At once the cap changed to a slate, on which was
make everything ready for the wedding.
After a great deal of hard work, for the Lion was heavy, they managed
everyone knew she had been the means of destroying the Wicked Witch and
courage to keep tramping forever, without getting anywhere at all.”
“I think you are a very bad man,” said Dorothy.
No one did so much as look at the travelers at first, except one little
voice. “But don’t strike me—please don’t—and I’ll do anything you want
Dorothy.
is going to turn out.” Then he said good-bye to them all in a cheerful
walked along at a brisk pace. “I have lost much flesh since I lived
The Lion and the Woodman both shook their heads, for they did not know.
As Dorothy bade the good-natured Guardian a last farewell she said:
all get ready, for it will be a long journey.”
add to their discomfort, they soon heard strange noises in the depths
people make me do things that everybody knows can’t be done? It was
it.
away.
continue the part a little longer.”
and managed to get along fairly well.
afraid even to growl while she stood by.
“I shall keep it, just the same,” said the Witch, laughing at her, “and
City; and the Winkies gave them three cheers and many good wishes to
fortunate for Kansas that you have brains.”
“Can’t you give me brains?” asked the Scarecrow.
“A Lion!” cried the little Queen. “Why, he would eat us all up.”
the bees turned and flew rapidly until they came to where Dorothy and
hill belongs to us, and we don’t allow anyone to cross it.”
stuffed with straw, you know, and that is why I am going to Oz to ask
looked up and saw Dorothy running toward her.
And the Wicked Witch said to the King Crow, “Fly at once to the
“Oh, yes,” said the girl, “and he is a great coward, too. He will be
The Lion Becomes the King of Beasts
the man laughed harshly as he said, “It isn’t as easy as you think!”
I heard was the farmer saying, ‘How do you like those ears?’
smelling yellow flowers and slept soundly until morning—all but the
there are many of these flowers together their odor is so powerful that
finally spared them, on condition that the Winged Monkeys should ever
“I have always liked you as you were,” said Dorothy simply.
that before?”
dog that has been running too long.
The next morning the soldier with the green whiskers came to the
Dorothy was thinking so earnestly as they walked along that she did not
beautiful places, and then Kansas would have no people at all. It is
which had also been stuffed with straw. On the feet were some old boots
and needles began to stick out of his brains. Finally he said:
“I think I could jump over it,” said the Cowardly Lion, after measuring
difficult that the Scarecrow often stumbled over the yellow bricks,
Chapter VII
carried them a long way past the road of yellow brick that led to the
You’re quite as stiff
the great Throne Room and bade him enter the presence of Oz.
“There is only one thing we can do,” returned the Lion, “and that is to
and chickens, all made of china, were standing about in groups.
“But if you are going to call the Winged Monkeys we must run away, for
use to her. As for the Lion, he sniffed the fresh air with delight and
pull it quite easily. Even the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman could sit
woodchopper, and after my father died I took care of my old mother as
“Well, then, what can be done?” inquired the Woodman.
to cross the hill of the Hammer-Heads.”
who had lived so long on the dry, gray prairies.
they saw the Lion; but no one spoke to them. Many shops stood in the
trees by the riverside and make a truck that will carry the Lion.”
long it took him to fill the basket, for it enabled him to keep away
usually has his own way. But what do YOU want?” he continued, speaking
which they were very much afraid. The people were all dressed in
beautiful green fields before them.
collar; and to Dorothy they presented a beautiful bracelet studded with
had carried her to this queer Land of Oz.
will tell you all about it.”
“I thought you asked Dorothy to kill the Witch,” said the Scarecrow, in
protected by the Power of Good, and that is greater than the Power of
and was soon out of sight.
wolves.
in the floor and climbed down the ladder into the small, dark hole.
“I know it,” said the Lion, hanging his head in shame. “I’ve always
Scarecrow had decided what to do.
leave her until she starts back to Kansas for good and all.”
little girl we dare not harm, nor the dog she carries in her arms. Your
midst of a great meadow of poppies. Now it is well known that when
So they sat down and listened while he told the following tale.
as the river carried us away.”
The tinsmiths looked the Woodman over carefully and then answered that
with fear, for she knew what a powerful charm belonged to them. At
“By means of the Golden Cap I shall command the Winged Monkeys to carry
The road was smooth and well paved, now, and the country about was
silver whistle.
But one day the girl thought of Aunt Em, and said, “We must go back to
nose, and mouth painted on it to represent a face. An old, pointed blue
and rule over them and the Yellow Land of the West. Finding they were
“Glinda might,” he suggested.
“Come in,” called Oz, and the Woodman entered and said, “I have come
green silk more than twenty feet long.
friends were at first dazzled by the brilliancy of the wonderful City.
“Is he tame?” asked the woman, opening the door a little wider.
and rules over the Quadlings. Besides, her castle stands on the edge of
afraid, although he was much disappointed.
and terrible a roar that Dorothy screamed and the Scarecrow fell over
“With pleasure,” she answered, and brought a towel at once. Then the
the sky in all directions. The sun had baked the plowed land into a
one. If he does, I will go back to the Munchkin maiden and marry her.”
do. At his word the band flew down and seized Quelala, carried him in
and across the pretty bridges until they saw before them a very
“I am Oz, the Great and Terrible,” spoke the Beast, in a voice that was
“But we must cross it,” said the Scarecrow. “We’re going to the country
said Dorothy, “for it would be unwise for us to go any other way except
the dishes, a table, three or four chairs, and the beds. Uncle Henry
had him make me a new leg out of tin. The leg worked very well, once I
“Oh, I see,” said the Tin Woodman. “But, after all, brains are not the
Then the beasts bowed down to the Lion as their King, and he promised
This did not hurt the Scarecrow, but it surprised him, and he looked
Every one of the travelers made the Winkies a pretty speech in return,
sad voice in which the man spoke.
sprang from her bed and with Toto at her heels ran and opened the door.
Woodman and the Lion, and even on little Toto; and all were locked fast
make a visit to a great brother Wizard who lived in the clouds. The
to be blinded by the glare of the Emerald City, so she said nothing.
Emerald City belong to us, and we can do just as we please. When I
“There lived here then, away at the North, a beautiful princess, who
sharp claws, he knocked the spider’s head from its body. Jumping down,
act.
the hard floor would not hurt their feet. Of course they took pains not
elbow close to her side.
The Scarecrow listened carefully, and said, “I cannot understand why
dressed in a pretty green silk gown, entered the room. She had lovely
“I certainly shall if I am able,” the Scarecrow replied; “but I must
The balloon was by this time tugging hard at the rope that held it to
the courtyard to tell the Lion that the Wicked Witch of the West had
from the end of the poppy bed, where the sweet grass spread in
Throne Room every morning, although they were never permitted to see
“Are there many of these mice which call you Queen and are willing to
that stretched about the Emerald City on every side. They slept that
woods far below them.
the middle of the kitchen floor, and then by her magic arts made the
“Oh, no. They must obey the wearer of the Cap. Good-bye!” And she
“I believe I will try it myself,” said the Woodman, and shouldering his
walked around. As for the Scarecrow, having no brains, he walked
best things in the world.”
“Anyone would know that,” said Dorothy.
There were many people—men, women, and children—walking about, and
“Why, don’t you know?” she returned, in surprise.
where Dorothy’s first act was to call all the Winkies together and tell
in surprise.
The farms were not nearly so well cared for here as they were farther
cannot leave it. There has never been a Winged Monkey in Kansas yet,
“She was the Wicked Witch of the East, as I said,” answered the little
At poor old Mr. Joker?
thought that was the end of me. But the tinsmith happened to come
into a big room where the Witch Glinda sat upon a throne of rubies.
“My body shone so brightly in the sun that I felt very proud of it and
favorite color.
Then they all looked at the river and saw the Scarecrow perched upon
The Scarecrow watched the Woodman while he worked, and said to him:
But the Tin Woodman caught the dog in his arms and held him tight,
“We!” exclaimed the girl. “Are you going with me?”
The country of the Quadlings seemed rich and happy. There was field
come from behind them. They turned and walked through the forest a few
the people came out to look at her and bow low as she went by; for
“How do you feel now?” asked Oz.
in a corner of the room, just as if it were not one of the most
for the world.”
away. For a day and a night I traveled through the air, and on the
beautiful country, with green meadows dotted with bright flowers and
“I ran as fast as I could,” he said, sitting down and yawning, “but the
deal of chattering and noise, the Winged Monkeys flew away to the place
Cap had been made for a wedding present to Quelala, and it is said to
They carried the sleeping girl to a pretty spot beside the river, far
“What can we do to save him?” asked Dorothy.
Before them was a great stretch of country having a floor as smooth and
in the midst of a strange people, who, seeing me come from the clouds,
it pleased him. “I am a humbug.”
“But Toto!” said the girl anxiously. “What will protect him?”
while he stood silently gazing at the Ball of Fire it became so
“We must cross this strange place in order to get to the other side,”
“We have lost our way,” said Dorothy. “Can you tell us where the
They got along quite well at first, but when they reached the middle of
“We will!” cried all the mice, in a shrill chorus. And then they
kept quiet all night, although of course they could not sleep.
fruit.
When morning came, they started again. Before they had gone far they
foot.
Queen—the Queen of all the Field Mice!”
that stood in the middle of the room. It was shaped like a chair and
and she will enchant us and make us her slaves.”
from the branches that she gathered some of it, finding it just what
picked up the leg sulkily and led her cow away, the poor animal limping
“I suppose not,” said Dorothy.
brownie, or in any other form that pleases him. But who the real Oz is,
unable to find a place to pass the night.”
So Dorothy went first, holding Toto in her arms, the Tin Woodman
put a few brains into his head,” she replied.
“We can do nothing for him,” said the Tin Woodman, sadly; “for he is
He was quite short and stout and had a big head, which was flat at the
A chorus of boisterous laughter came from the other rocks, and Dorothy
So the Woodman took his axe and began to chop down small trees to make
Here they dropped the poor Woodman, who fell a great distance to the
happy that he hugged them all, even the Lion and Toto; and as they
than awake, he gave a great spring and landed directly upon the
“so good-bye and good luck to you.”
girl a good-bye kiss, and Dorothy thanked her for all the kindness she
When he had fastened the Scarecrow’s head on his body again he said to
trees grew so big and close together that their branches met over the
“Good-bye, and thank you very much,” returned the girl; and the Monkeys
good breakfast.”
“Once,” began the leader, “we were a free people, living happily in the
however, she found a boy who was handsome and manly and wise beyond his
“It is only a stuffed man. I will peck his eyes out.”
heaps like fine coal that she stamped her foot and tore her hair and
people together and get them to pay to see the circus,” he explained.
too long they also would fall asleep.
Golden Cap, and said, “Why don’t you use the charm of the Cap, and call
the Scarecrow, when she had finished her dinner. So she told him all
sparkled with gems, as did everything else. In the center of the chair
up to the Lion and bowed, saying:
someday I shall get the other one from you, too.”
green egg.
“Oh, very!” answered Oz. He put the heart in the Woodman’s breast and
that I can never do.”
where the trees and branches grew so thick over the road that the
hat, that had belonged to some Munchkin, was perched on his head, and
the Scarecrow the dress and the mask he had worn when he seemed to be
Then he put down his axe and sat beside the Scarecrow, who said, “It
Scarecrow; for when he found himself alone in his room he stood
one of them the King himself. They had made a chair of their hands and
your silver shoes he was very much interested. At last I told him about
answered the Scarecrow.
“Let me try it first,” said the Scarecrow, “for it doesn’t hurt me to
but, nothing daunted, I had them replaced with tin ones. The Wicked
pavement of the same green marble, and where the blocks were joined
the Munchkins, “and there is some charm connected with them; but what
herself in a wonderful place. It was a big, round room with a high
shot a spray of green perfume into the air, to fall back into a
So once more the little company set off upon the journey, the Lion
“Are you a Munchkin?” asked Dorothy.
troubled by the scent of the flowers.
“Oh, no,” declared the Scarecrow; “this Lion is a coward.”
everything, and turning to the dignified little Mouse, he said:
wife as soon as possible, the axe slipped all at once and cut off my
beast could wish a pleasanter home.”
journey.”
Scarecrow, she was surprised to see one of the eyes slowly wink at her.
“Oh, thank you—thank you!” cried the Scarecrow. “I’ll find a way to use
high up above everything the spires and dome of the Palace of Oz.
“so you have certainly saved my life. How did you happen to be here?”
tree trunk. It has eight of these long legs, and as the monster crawls
Witch ruled.”
the Lion is everywhere thought to be the King of Beasts. I learned that
“Then we are all right,” answered the Scarecrow, “for you can carry us
plans to destroy these strangers had failed; but she was a powerful
and green pop corn were offered for sale, as well as green shoes, green
much covered by dried branches and dead leaves from the trees, and the
But the raft was nearly done, and after the Tin Woodman had cut a few
rubies running round it. This Golden Cap had a charm. Whoever owned it
“Well, I’ll try it,” said the Lion. “Who will go first?”
of his prison and set him free. They went in together to the castle,
“That cannot be done,” he said. “We belong to this country alone, and
When the Scarecrow found himself among his friends again, he was so
barking merrily all the time.
hanging on a peg beside her bed. It was gingham, with checks of white
of the poppy bed to the green fields, where he could breathe the sweet,
“If we leave her here she will die,” said the Lion. “The smell of the
Toto ran over to the trees and began to bark at the birds sitting
I must have time to think it over.”
rested very well indeed.
“Come in,” said Oz.
that fell between the trees. She ran to the place and then stopped
and ever so much.”
They told who they were, and the girl soldier went into the Castle.
her arms. When the Cowardly Lion stepped upon the raft it tipped badly,
dreary and gray our homes are, we people of flesh and blood would
being rocked gently, like a baby in a cradle.
The Cowardly Lion was much pleased to hear that the Wicked Witch had
tigers,” replied the Lion, “and with claws so long and sharp that they
on three legs. As she left them the milkmaid cast many reproachful
and leave her there.”
Chapter III. How Dorothy Saved the Scarecrow
was written solely to please children of today. It aspires to being a
about it, if you wish.”
“Don’t speak of it, I beg of you,” replied the Woodman. “I have no
“It may be,” said the Lion.
head from its body, so that it immediately died. As soon as he could
enemy and bring peace to all the animals of the forest once more.”
Why do you stare
him as he sat behind his screen and gave him your message. He said he
bright sunshine came in at the window, flooding the little room. She
“My second command to the Winged Monkeys,” said Glinda “will be that
“I am Oz, the Great and Terrible,” said the little man, in a trembling
was raised above the stalks of corn by means of the pole stuck up its
after which they walked away through the trees. The Witch gave Dorothy
ears sticking up through the hole, for the strong pressure of the air
When they saw the Witch of the East was dead the Munchkins sent a swift
velvet; and all of them fitted Dorothy exactly.
find their way back through the big fields of buttercups and yellow
thinking she might steal them. But the child was so proud of her pretty
“Is the Wicked Witch really destroyed?” asked the Voice, and Dorothy
laying a white cloth over the top. Then she looked down at her feet and
They walked back to the road. Dorothy helped him over the fence, and
“One of my greatest fears was the Witches, for while I had no magical
for the first time in his life he was too tired to chase a butterfly
straw and cannot be easily damaged. There are worse things in the world
find herself lying upon the grass, with thousands of mice standing
underneath. So he walked forward to the tree, but just as he came under
“We shan’t wait a day longer,” said the Scarecrow.
“I’m not surprised that you are,” returned Dorothy. “They must be
they were none of them nearly so large and brave as you.”
quite dead.
order they were given. But no person could command these strange
The soldier then left them and the Scarecrow said:
The eyes looked at her thoughtfully for a full minute. Then said the
The four travelers walked up to the great gate of Emerald City and rang
to escape the great Wildcat?” They all bowed so low to the little Queen
be harder than ever to get back to Kansas and Aunt Em again. Sometimes
frightened, as these birds always are by scarecrows, and did not dare
Head nor the Lady, for Oz had taken the shape of a most terrible Beast.
“Oh, gracious!” cried Dorothy. “Are you a real witch?”
“The Witch of the East was proud of those silver shoes,” said one of
things. Think of me, and the terrible trouble I’m in at being found
At noon they sat down by the roadside, near a little brook, and Dorothy
Toto jumped out of Dorothy’s arms and hid under the bed, and the girl
“No one knows it but you four—and myself,” replied Oz. “I have fooled
“Exactly so!” declared the little man, rubbing his hands together as if
Dorothy presently asked him a question the Tin Woodman could not open
I should have run myself—I’m such a coward; but just as soon as they
heart?”
The next morning the sun was behind a cloud, but they started on, as if
followed, and the Scarecrow came next. The Lion, although he was
when they came out from its gloom saw before them a steep hill, covered
The Lion was about to reply when suddenly they came to another gulf
“He is a good Wizard. Whether he is a man or not I cannot tell, for I
“This is bad,” said the Tin Woodman, “for if we cannot get to the land
The Road Through the Forest
the straw I am stuffed with would come out, and that would spoil the
also. As for the little old woman, she took off her cap and balanced
put his cold little nose into her face and whined dismally. Dorothy sat
chopped off the branch and set the little dog free.
wonderful manner.
She bade her friends good-bye, and again started along the road of
Dorothy stood up and found she was in her stocking-feet. For the Silver
“You’ve had plenty of time already,” said the Tin Woodman angrily.
be still.
the air ever since I rusted, and I’m glad to be able to put it down at
again for saving him.
The Lion hesitated no longer, but drank till the dish was empty.
them was no higher than Dorothy’s knee.
felt his heart rattling around in his breast.
green, but pure white. The ribbon around Toto’s neck had also lost its
“And I am going to ask him to send Toto and me back to Kansas,” added
across it easily.”
“Is he made of tin, or stuffed?” asked the Lion.
“That’s why he nearly blunted my claws,” said the Lion. “When they
your brains in their proper place.”
more logs and fastened them together with wooden pins, they were ready
The north and south winds met where the house stood, and made it the
lives in the City of Emeralds.”
her ears; and she still looked at the little girl with wonder that she
“But,” said Dorothy, after a moment’s thought, “Aunt Em has told me
forefoot.
the road and divided the forest as far as they could see on either
the Scarecrow brought Dorothy some fruit from a tree near by, which she
“Therefore you have done a great deed, as well as a brave one, in
Woodman lay, all battered and bent. His axe was near him, but the blade
grateful to you, and shall never forget your kindness.”
“It is written inside the Golden Cap,” replied the Queen of the Mice.
rough boots, and he looked stern and solemn, and rarely spoke.
the desert. How can she do so?”
all the Winged Monkeys brought before her, and she said at first that
should be quite happy.”
the elephants and the tigers and the bears had ever tried to fight me,
at the Lion, “if that is the case you may come in, and I will give you
twisted its neck until it died. And then another crow flew at him, and
went on into the forest.
“My name is Dorothy,” said the girl, “and I am going to the Emerald
started to get him. Aunt Em, badly frightened, threw open the trap door
carry with them.
“We must get back to the road, in some way,” said Dorothy.
the scarlet fields. The Scarecrow began to grumble a bit.
by a small branch and shaken until he howled. But the Woodman promptly
Aunt Em had just come out of the house to water the cabbages when she
get tired. I’ll tell you a secret,” he continued, as he walked along.
“We must protect him ourselves if he is in danger,” replied the Tin
water touch her in any way.
“I didn’t know there was a charm,” answered Dorothy, in surprise. “What
went upon their journey.
Chapter XVIII
far that a current of air struck it and carried it many, many miles
little bells around the brims that tinkled sweetly as they moved. The
“That was a good ride,” said the little girl.
“Let me have your name, and I will ask Glinda if she will receive you.”
sky above the City had a green tint, and the rays of the sun were
discouragements; but before them was a lovely, sunny country that
there, and now I am anxious for a chance to show the other beasts how
big beast like you, to bite a poor little dog!”
around the neck of each mouse and the other end to the truck. Of course
body of the Scarecrow in her arms instead of kissing his painted face,
There was, in her cupboard, a Golden Cap, with a circle of diamonds and
“I will return to the Emerald City,” he replied, “for Oz has made me
Scarecrow, as he stood beside the girl, “for we have come nearly as far
Dorothy at once ran back to the cottage and found the oil-can, and then
dropped him into the water.
beside the river. He was dressed in a rich costume of pink silk and
“I am Oz, the Great and Terrible. Who are you, and why do you seek me?”
deadly fear of them for many years; so you can imagine how pleased I
through the ages, for every healthy youngster has a wholesome and
he took great care never to be cruel or unkind to anything.
hats of the men were blue; the little woman’s hat was white, and she
as long as she had one of the shoes she owned half the power of their
leave her little dog behind. Toto had run into the crowd to bark at a
City. It was high and thick and of a bright green color.
woman possibly mean by calling her a sorceress, and saying she had
hands of the Wicked Witch of the West, who made us enslave the Winkies,
“I thought Oz was a great Head,” said Dorothy.
among the poppies a long while, breathing in their deadly fragrance;
But day by day passed away, and they still saw nothing before them but
Chapter IV. The Road Through the Forest
Room, where he saw, sitting in the emerald throne, a most lovely Lady.
“Well,” said the Cowardly Lion, drawing a long breath of relief, “I see
cabinets and drawing-room tables, but our lives are much pleasanter
coming storm. There now came a sharp whistling in the air from the
but if you should fall asleep you are too big to be carried.”
The Tin Woodman was about to reply when he heard a low growl, and
Chapter XV. The Discovery of Oz, the Terrible
“Bless your dear heart,” she said, “I am sure I can tell you of a way
“Ziz-zy, zuz-zy, zik!” said Dorothy, who was now standing on both feet.
became rougher and hillier, for there were no farms nor houses in this
The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman were rather frightened at first, for
The Woodman set to work at once, and so sharp was his axe that the tree
the soft, fresh grass; and it was not long before they reached the road
was afternoon before they came to the great wall that surrounded the
journey.”
breath of air reached them.
times a wolf was killed, so that at last they all lay dead in a heap
the danger close at hand.
The Lion at once passed through the door, and glancing around saw, to
that he shall treat you all with kindness.”
jar made her catch her breath and wonder what had happened; and Toto
we have a long journey before us, I will pass the time by telling you
good-bye she clapped the heels of her shoes together three times,
Woodman.
him.”
contented. The Scarecrow told them there were wonderful thoughts in his
things around in little green carts, which they pushed before them.
trees to offer them shade; so that before night Dorothy and Toto and
through the grass to their homes. The Queen of the Mice was the last to
The little girl began to weep, she was so much disappointed; and the
desert, and then it should be easy to find your way home.”
they were awakened by the crowing of a green cock that lived in the
of the Quadlings.”
Turning to the Tin Woodman, she asked, “What will become of you when
I was stuck on a pole in a cornfield, where I could make-believe scare
road of yellow brick. It was almost dark under the trees, for the
“I am anxious to get back to my aunt and uncle, for I am sure they will
life of our Queen?”
will grant you an audience, if you so desire; but each one of you must
which were here very uneven. Sometimes, indeed, they were broken or
the mark upon your forehead, and he decided he would admit you to his
“but the kind Stork saved me, and if I ever get any brains I shall find
The Scarecrow was both pleased and proud at the fulfillment of his
again.
we are going to live a little while longer, and I am glad of it, for it
eyes winked again and looked upon her anxiously, as if the Great Oz
like to go back to Kansas.”
“Did you groan?” asked Dorothy.
in different shades of the color about them. It took three days to sew
the little girl, although her friends were all quite happy and
poison of the flowers, and here they laid her gently on the soft grass
comfortable bed that had sheets of green silk and a green velvet
Chapter XIII. The Rescue
“Congratulate me. I am going to Oz to get my brains at last. When I
love who has not a heart, and so I am resolved to ask Oz to give me
charm, and Dorothy could not use it against her, even had she known how
the direction of their journey for fear of getting lost. So they looked
made to work hard during many years for the Wicked Witch, who had
Kansas for you. But first you must get to see him, and that will be a
hear me roar they all try to get away from me, and of course I let them
the sky too. Aunt Em was washing the dishes.
A woman opened it just far enough to look out, and said, “What do you
nor groan.
powerful as a telescope, and could see everywhere. So, as she sat in
country of the Munchkins. The Quadlings themselves, who were short and
makes one forget he is afraid.”
Dorothy looked, and gave a little cry of fright. There, indeed, just
midst of a country of marvelous beauty. There were lovely patches of
noticed how old and worn her shoes were.
of the biggest mice spoke.
journey,” remarked the Lion.
full length. She was not much hurt, but in her fall one of the Silver
heart of its own and therefore cannot feel for me. But if it is the
tin. After this the enchanted axe cut off my arms, one after the other;
determined to go, the Winkies gave Toto and the Lion each a golden
go at once to fight the monster.”
East, and for setting our people free from bondage.”
courtyard and harness the Cowardly Lion like a horse; it would amuse
purple velvet, and my grandfather thought he would see what he could
“Suppose we call the field mice,” she suggested. “They could probably
At once there came running to her from all directions a pack of great
place, abounding in jewels and precious metals, and every good thing
every part of the room. And at last they looked at Dorothy again.
either side of his funny, wee nose. Toto played all day long, and
“But could you not be mended?” asked the girl.
the air and back to the bank, where Dorothy and the Lion and the Tin
At that moment several mice were seen running up as fast as their
long as she lived. Then I made up my mind that instead of living alone
had taken before, and all were greatly surprised when they looked about
that Oz had by accident caught on fire and was burning up; but when he
“That must be a matter of opinion,” said the Tin Woodman. “For my part,
part of the next until they came to the tall tree in the branches of
careful. When Oz gives me a heart of course I needn’t mind so much.”
“I felt sad at this, for it showed I was not such a good Scarecrow
“They are monstrous beasts with bodies like bears and heads like
build us a raft, so we can float to the other side.”
for he was big and heavy; but the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman stood
“And I want him to give me courage,” said the Cowardly Lion.
“True,” the Tin Woodman returned. “So, if you will allow me to join
himself, whose name was Boq. Then she sat upon a settee and watched the
Monkeys to help them, and find out whether he kept his promises or not.
words it spoke:
companions.
their branches, and that probably these were the policemen of the
untiring as the Tin Woodman, and when night came the work was not done.
to get him up on the truck. Then the Queen hurriedly gave her people
little legs could carry them, and when they saw their Queen they
The Lion was angry at this speech, but could say nothing in reply, and
Emerald City would blind you. Even those who live in the City must wear
over.
“If Dorothy would only be contented to live in the Emerald City,”
The little girl gave a cry of amazement and looked about her, her eyes
Dorothy saw at once that this was true, so she only nodded and went on
part of the Palace. Of course this politeness was wasted on the
“That just happened,” returned Dorothy simply; “I could not help it.”
back yard of the Palace, and the cackling of a hen that had laid a
Indeed, at first he was angry and said I should send you back where you
harmless creature.
“And I thought Oz was a terrible Beast,” said the Tin Woodman.
but Oz made no reply. They thought the Great Wizard would send for them
“What must I do?” asked the girl.
have you shown to rooms where you may rest in comfort after your
caught the four travelers and Toto up in their arms and flew away with
monster’s back. Then, with one blow of his heavy paw, all armed with
They agreed to say nothing of what they had learned, and went back to
the Stork again and do her some kindness in return.”
But the strangest of all were the people who lived in this queer
lost in the great fields. They kept on walking, however, and at night
fierce Kalidahs.
through the portal into the streets of the Emerald City.
leave.
“It is the same at the South,” said another, “for I have been there and
“Where is Kansas?” asked the man, with surprise.
blocks of ruby. Everyone loved her, but her greatest sorrow was that
my head off, as long as it will be a better one when you put it on
“A balloon,” said Oz, “is made of silk, which is coated with glue to
“We will carry you,” replied the King, and no sooner had he spoken than
be a coward.”
The woman now gave Dorothy a bed to sleep in, and Toto lay down beside
is better for people to keep away from Oz, unless they have business
When Dorothy had time to open these books she found them full of queer
in your breast, so I can put your heart in the right place. I hope it
and, really, that was the only thing I wished in all the world.”
When these people drew near the house where Dorothy was standing in the
“I shall go with Dorothy,” declared the Lion, “for I am tired of your
“But I thought you had gone to visit the Wicked Witch of the West.”
As he spoke several of the beasts caught sight of him, and at once the
strangers and destroy them.
walked up to it, while Toto ran around the pole and barked.
merrily at his own mishap.
sadly. “When I grew up I became a ventriloquist, and at that I was very
them.”
side. The Lion went back a third time and got the Tin Woodman, and then
to find himself still alive.
their wings should be tied and they should be treated as they had
away, and now the house was as dull and gray as everything else.
and fast at the joy of meeting her old friend again, and these tears
“I understand how you feel,” said the little girl, who was truly sorry
vegetables in abundance. Evidently the Munchkins were good farmers and
about.”
due South.”
“All the same,” said the Scarecrow, “I shall ask for brains instead of
Toto curled up on the blue rug beside her.
after do three times the bidding of the owner of the Golden Cap. This
Witch died. I am fond of the Winkies, and if I could get back again to
she could; for she was glad the Wicked Witch had decided not to kill
I’m sorry I had to put a patch on your breast, but it really couldn’t
his little mistress. Toto did not really care whether he was in Kansas
“I’m very sorry,” returned Dorothy. “Please forgive us.”
and even those who wait upon him do not see him face to face.”
Chapter VIII. The Deadly Poppy Field
Dorothy was ready to cry with disappointment. “I have wasted the charm
“What is that?” asked Dorothy; “the Munchkin farmer who made you?”
through rough and dangerous places before you reach the end of your
and saw no one at all in the room. They kept close to the door and
“Well, I’ll tell you what I think,” said the little man. “You see, when
and flapping of wings, as the band of Winged Monkeys flew up to them.
“It is not a great way,” answered the farmer’s wife. “Take the road to
the order to start, for she feared if the mice stayed among the poppies
“No, but it’s farther from here,” he said, shaking his head at her
of the Tin Woodman, and now they knew why he was so anxious to get a
pieces.
full of dangers to travelers. There are wild beasts in the woods, and a
having been made such a little while before. Many crows and other birds
under the corner of the great beam the house rested on, two feet were
“How can I get there?” asked Dorothy.
On the next morning the soldier with the green whiskers came to the Tin
green, shining walls of the Emerald City before them. She wondered at
warmed her and made her feel less lonely. She and Toto ate the last of
made up their minds that only the first row of trees could bend down
the painted eyes of the Scarecrow were dazzled by their brilliancy.
The Tin Woodman had asked Dorothy to put the oil-can in her basket.
Dorothy ate a hearty supper and was waited upon by the rich Munchkin
course, if Dorothy stays here she will never get back to Kansas.”
Yet the old time fairy tale, having served for generations, may now be
here in our own country.”
At this the Queen of the Mice stuck her head out from underneath a
and so well did he work that by the time the mice began to arrive the
She thought she must have been mistaken at first, for none of the
square green bottle, the contents of which he poured into a green-gold
On the fourth day, to her great joy, Oz sent for her, and when she
belonged to the Witch of the East.
made the four wheels out of short pieces of a big tree trunk. So fast
top with brains.
It was not so high as the first, however, and by standing upon the
If Oz will not give you any brains you will be no worse off than you
ate for her dinner.
bidding. And if he is the great Head, he will be at my mercy; for I
glad she was to have her little girl at home again.
“Don’t try, my dear,” he answered. “We should like to keep you with us,
cowardly than you are if they allow you to scare them so easily.”
terrible thing to undergo, but during the year I stood there I had time
Guardian of the Gates wore around his neck. When they were on, Dorothy
after all; but the old crow comforted me, saying, ‘If you only had
Now that they were reunited, Dorothy and her friends spent a few happy
my body and my arms and legs; and when they fastened on my head, at
“Are there any other lions in this forest?” he asked.
them.”
Scarecrow are destroyed, and the Lion is tied up in your yard. The
Shoes came off; and before she could reach it, the Witch had snatched
collection of hearts, of all sizes and shapes.”
quite cheerfully, and had a fine time looking at the pretty gardens and
this reason none of the Quadlings ever come to the Emerald City.”
green girl, who showed each of them to their old rooms at once, so they
they would do me no harm; but the Witches of the East and West were
face. I am the Guardian of the Gates, and since you demand to see the
black bees came flying toward her.
small pieces.”
away.
was bathing. Indeed, the old Witch never touched water, nor ever let
desert, unless it is Oz himself.”
The man was so surprised at this answer that he sat down to think it
usual. Dorothy stood in the door with Toto in her arms, and looked at
“Here is a great tree, standing close to the ditch. If the Tin Woodman
The reason the Lion did not have to do as the Witch wished was that
“To be sure they could,” cried the Scarecrow. “Why didn’t we think of
“I cannot tell,” she returned, “but you may come with me, if you like.
will rule over you. I command you to obey him as you would me.”
will be the wisest man in all the Land of Oz.”
the Scarecrow bent them carefully until they were quite free from rust
Chapter XXII. The Country of the Quadlings
the wolves came on the Tin Woodman swung his arm and chopped the wolf’s
they went the more dismal and lonesome the country became.
words on it, asked, “Is your name Dorothy, my dear?”
tried to go nearer, the heat was so intense that it singed his
will think more of me when you hear the splendid thoughts my new brain
seemed to beckon them on to the Emerald City.
the heartaches and nightmares are left out.
little girl, who had been carried by a cyclone many miles from home;
“Why not?” she replied.
slender as a wasp’s waist. This gave the Lion a hint of the best way to
“Very well,” answered the little man; “I will get it for you.”
nothing on earth, and would gladly face an army or a dozen of the
down to the floor and rolled around so queerly that they seemed to see
Once more they could see fences built beside the road; but these were
“Why?” asked Dorothy.
They came from all directions, and there were thousands of them: big
when he lived in Kansas, and he saw no harm in it.
said the Lion, “I should be quite happy.”
and found she was crying herself at this sorrowful parting from her
dancing.
Then she went back to the house, and having helped herself and Toto to
on account of his good fortune.
But whenever there is danger, my heart begins to beat fast.”
asleep among the poppies. The flowers had been too strong for the huge
“This will serve me a lesson,” said he, “to look where I step. For if I
When they returned to the castle the Wicked Witch beat them well with a
beautiful, so that the travelers rejoiced in leaving the forest far
one ever knew what it was, for he didn’t mention it. And the Scarecrow
“I see a little cottage at the right of us,” he said, “built of logs
The Emerald City was soon left far behind. As they advanced the ground
The Lion also curled himself up to sleep and Toto lay beside him.
they all started upon the journey, greatly enjoying the walk through
was ready to show them to the Palace. Taking a big golden key from a
keep the gas in it. I have plenty of silk in the Palace, so it will be
“Don’t! Please don’t,” begged the Tin Woodman. “I should certainly weep
“You killed the Witch of the East and you wear the silver shoes, which
press her hand upon her heart whenever Dorothy’s merry voice reached
soon after they had begun their journey again they came to a place
wrinkles in it.
Chapter IV
could see that in spite of his pretty clothes of red and yellow and
blew upon a silver whistle that hung around her neck.
fell out of the branches and rolled off on the ground.
forever in the desert.
the moon came out and shone brightly. So they lay down among the sweet
to travel to the Land of the South and ask Glinda to help her. For, of
“We are lost, for they will surely tear us to pieces with their sharp
no brains and the Scarecrow no heart, or each got what he wanted.
Great Oz I must take you to his Palace. But first you must put on the
This made Dorothy so very angry that she picked up the bucket of water
the bell. After ringing several times, it was opened by the same
attack the creature, and as he knew it was easier to fight it asleep
How the Balloon Was Launched
hats, and green clothes of all sorts. At one place a man was selling
country of the West, and the ground was untilled.
quickly in the sun. That is the end of her. But the silver shoes are
expect me to send you back to Kansas unless you do something for me in
“Something must be done to save us. I think I can swim to the shore and
the shoes, and after shaking the dust out of them handed them to
then, before she had time to think about it, she was safe on the other
in the straw, and he often growled in an unfriendly way at the
the tree that rested on their side of the ditch. The Tin Woodman began
“He is my dog, Toto,” answered Dorothy.
with many ropes to the bottom of the balloon.
Now go, and do not ask to see me again until you have done your task.”
peace of their journey. Once, indeed, the Tin Woodman stepped upon a
“This little girl,” said the Scarecrow to the soldier, “wishes to cross
them that they were no longer slaves.
Oz, and claim his promise.”
until you do as I wish.”
Chapter XIX. Attacked by the Fighting Trees
the rock the strangest man the travelers had ever seen.
to the Land of Oz, how she had found her companions, and of the
me as soon as I could earn enough money to build a better house for
“It is kind of you to like a Scarecrow,” he replied. “But surely you
those of the Munchkins.
Chapter XI
was the new farmhouse Uncle Henry built after the cyclone had carried
Dorothy then gave her the Golden Cap, and the Witch said to the
the leaves and branches. He fastened it together with wooden pegs and
a raft, and while he was busy at this the Scarecrow found on the
large emeralds set closely together. In the center of the roof was a
Chapter X. The Guardian of the Gates
will protect you from harm.”
wolves. They had long legs and fierce eyes and sharp teeth.
ever seen.
Chapter I
the Scarecrow twisted its neck also. There were forty crows, and forty
wish.”
you should wish to leave this beautiful country and go back to the dry,
him from death; and the Cowardly Lion laughed, and said:
“But how about the voice?” she inquired.
Wizard Oz, who would soon send her back to her own home again.
peg on the wall, he opened another gate, and they all followed him
broken handle. Others polished the blade until all the rust was removed
While Dorothy was looking earnestly into the queer, painted face of the
ruled here, or I should have set the people free myself.”
“Oh, he will see you,” said the soldier who had taken her message to
gorgeous frocks of silver and gold and purple; and shepherds dressed in
the Country of the West, I should like nothing better than to rule over
and stretched out his arms. And when the crows saw him they were
After this they sat down beside the Lion until he should awaken; and
away from the scent of the flowers, he sleeps on and on forever. But
first rock when they heard a rough voice cry out, “Keep back!”
when he is in his own form, no living person can tell.”
“No,” answered the Scarecrow; “it’s a lighted match.”
“We must journey on until we find the road of yellow brick again,” said
Instantly the wicked woman gave a loud cry of fear, and then, as
all the other Monkeys at once agreed to the condition, and that is how
obliged to go out into the courtyard and hold it in the sun till it
The Wonderful Wizard of Oz
The next morning, after breakfast, the green maiden came to fetch
flattened out, and patted his straw into shape again.
under a block of wood.”
“I did not like to be deserted this way. So I tried to walk after them.
“Come, Dorothy!” cried the Wizard. “Hurry up, or the balloon will fly
she could find no one to love in return, since all the men were much
So they called the yellow Winkies and asked them if they would help to
After this she stood upon both feet and cried in a loud voice:
So the Scarecrow followed him and was admitted into the great Throne
may hurt these pretty little people so they will never get over it.”
“The trees seem to have made up their minds to fight us, and stop our
them forever.”
The Wonderful Wizard of Oz
become the King of Beasts, as men call me.”
There seemed to be no horses nor animals of any kind; the men carried
mouth is only painted, and if I should cut a hole in it so I could eat,
He leaned on his axe and thought a moment. Then he said, “The Winkies
He opened the big box, and Dorothy saw that it was filled with
There were no fences at all by the roadside now, and the land was rough
careful not to hurt any living creature; and as he walked along he wept
shoes that she never took them off except at night and when she took
had shown to her friends and herself.
know. But the people remembered him lovingly, and said to one another:
The wicked woman was greatly pleased with the success of her trick, for
perhaps he will dream that he has found courage at last.”
“I don’t know, I’m sure. To think of your striking a stuffed man, like
“But I don’t want to live here,” cried Dorothy. “I want to go to
stuck on a pole in the middle of a river. I am afraid I shall never
was clothed all in green, from his head to his feet, and even his skin
told me how to get back to Kansas.”
“There was one of the Munchkin girls who was so beautiful that I soon
arched roof, and the walls and ceiling and floor were covered with
“Have you seen Oz?”
Again the eyes looked at her sharply, and they saw she was telling the
to cross the tree. And the Lion said to Dorothy:
“This was all we ever had to do until the Golden Cap fell into the
vexation, and shot their heads high in the air, but they could not
think it really is an Emerald City, and it certainly is a beautiful
glad he had been rescued.
won’t hurt you.”
They looked again in every part of the room, and then, seeing no one,
and a bowl of milk for Toto.
“No,” she answered, “one is of tin, and one of straw; one is a girl and
“Why should I do this for you?” asked Oz.
“I am Dorothy, the Small and Meek. I have come to you for help.”
claws. But stand close behind me, and I will fight them as long as I am
would be caught in the silken bag. Gradually the balloon swelled out
have cost the princess half her kingdom. Of course my grandfather and
Witch, as well as a wicked one, and she soon made up her mind how to
Dorothy caught Toto at last and started to follow her aunt. When she
off, but the Wicked Witch was angry to find them in her country; so she
and she had never killed anything in all her life.
“Of course not,” answered Dorothy. “How should I?”
new way to kill my love for the beautiful Munchkin maiden, and made my
“You must keep your promises to us!” exclaimed Dorothy.
you are sure to get.”
Lion shook the dust out of his mane, and the Scarecrow patted himself
“I will,” declared the Scarecrow, “for, if you found that you could not
looks just like a man.’
“It is kind of you to wear that,” said Boq. “Blue is the color of the
and fast from terror. But being only tin, the Woodman was not at all
“You are certainly as good as you are beautiful! But you have not yet
enter his presence alone, and he will admit but one each day.
The soldier had the news carried straight to Oz that Dorothy and the
luck not to have a heart.”
showed bright against the green grass and the yellowing grain.
girl.
Wizard, I must admit.”
felt that she could help him if she would.
a row while Dorothy said:
have a heart. I have played Wizard for so many years that I may as well
“Is he a good man?” inquired the girl anxiously.
has broken her leg, and I must take her to the mender’s shop and have
Thus each of the little party was satisfied except Dorothy, who longed
and each is happy in having a kingdom to rule besides, I think I should
gorgeous in color and so light that they fluttered if the slightest
The streets were lined with beautiful houses all built of green marble
have never seen him.”
walked up to it and knocked at the door. It was opened by the farmer’s
was about her. There were neat fences at the sides of the road, painted
to Toto. Toto only wagged his tail; for, strange to say, he could not
“You’re more than that,” said the Scarecrow, in a grieved tone; “you’re
But the Lion went away into the forest and found his own supper, and no
“and that is the same thing. See!” she continued, pointing to the
for they had never seen a dog before.
many years ago, long before Oz came out of the clouds to rule over this
joints.
heard a silvery tinkle sound within. Then the big gate swung slowly
running up to her. Among them was the Queen herself, who asked, in her
“Ep-pe, pep-pe, kak-ke!” she said, standing on her left foot.
Chapter XXIII
“It is certainly too bad!” said the tender-hearted Woodman.
wizards amongst us.”
saying:
“We will do that gladly,” returned the tiger; and all the other beasts
the forest, and they walked so fast that Dorothy became tired, and had
well trained by a great master. I can imitate any kind of a bird or
“When the Witch is dead, come to me, and I will then give you the
help her into the basket, when, crack! went the ropes, and the balloon
thoroughly, he filled the top of the Scarecrow’s head with the mixture
Palace of Oz, the Great Wizard. There was a soldier before the door,
“She could not help it, for she is melted,” explained the Scarecrow.
Dorothy’s life became very sad as she grew to understand that it would
his pole in the middle of the water, looking very lonely and sad.
or the Land of Oz so long as Dorothy was with him; but he knew the
doing.
“You will be very welcome,” answered Dorothy, “for you will help to
When they were all sitting in a row on the top of the wall, they looked
crow of sense could see that you are only stuffed with straw.’ Then he
them in a great crowd to the Palace of Oz.
from all the rest of the world. Therefore we still have witches and
“What shall we do?” asked the Tin Woodman.
in this world, no matter whether one is a crow or a man.’
overheard—and I should be ruined. I’m supposed to be a Great Wizard.”
she continued, “that I am sure I could love you dearly. Won’t you let
his old form, and his joints worked as well as ever. To be sure, there
less than an hour.”
But it takes time to make a raft, even when one is as industrious and
up in a balloon. And she also felt sorry at losing Oz, and so did her
“I will not let him,” said the Woodman; “so do not be afraid.”
“Where is this city?” asked Dorothy.
hands were so clumsy and the nuts were so small that he dropped almost
Scarecrow.
shall we do now?”
was not a Wizard the people were proud of him. “For,” they said, “there
from the ceiling. It was really a ball of cotton, but when oil was
for its ears were lying close to its head and its mouth was wide open,
The Tin Woodman, raising his axe, rushed toward the little man and
met in the Throne Room and talked matters over. The Scarecrow sat in
along, and he made me a new head out of tin.
bear the sight of us, he called us all to him in the forest after he
“You see,” said the Cowardly Lion, with a whimper, “I haven’t the
“Please make yourselves comfortable while I go to the door of the
“And I want him to send me back to Kansas,” said Dorothy.
all the strips together, but when it was finished they had a big bag of
and sold the wood for a living. When I grew up, I too became a
small hole dug in the ground, called a cyclone cellar, where the family
even if he was a bad Wizard.
and the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman were waiting to hear what Oz had
and Aunt Em had a big bed in one corner, and Dorothy a little bed in
and as good as new.
they all followed him. He pointed to one corner, in which lay the great
Tin Woodman had no heart at that moment, for it would have beat loud
“‘Now I’ll make the eyes,’” said the farmer. So he painted my right
“You have plenty of courage, I am sure,” answered Oz. “All you need is
rusts my jaws so that I cannot speak.”
need never do wrong; but I have no heart, and so I must be very
I’ll go at once for the Golden Cap.”
The Witch of the North seemed to think for a time, with her head bowed
girl. When I began chopping again, my axe slipped and cut off my right
The soldier with the green whiskers was still on guard before the door,
slaves.”
L.F.B.
force of habit, for he remembered when he was made of flesh; but not
“He knew how to give me brains, and very good brains, too,” said the
Scarecrow. “I might have passed my whole life in the farmer’s
Woodman was sure it was strong and would answer their purpose. The
“And I shall never see Aunt Em and Uncle Henry,” said Dorothy,
they all shook hands with the soldier with the green whiskers, who had
Toto in her arms, the straw covered them entirely.
would be pleased to have his company. So the Tin Woodman shouldered his
were very kind to me, and wanted me to rule over them after the Wicked
And oh, Aunt Em! I’m so glad to be at home again!”
“Oz has sent for you. Follow me.”
“I am told,” said the third man, “that it is the same at the West. And
tell them of the terrible Beast he had seen. They all wondered greatly
notice when the Scarecrow stumbled into a hole and rolled over to the
“I’m very sorry, indeed,” said Dorothy, who was truly frightened to see
Chapter III
any place in the world in three steps, and each step will be made in
frighten him that he will grant all I ask. And if he is the lovely
was left but the silver shoes.
in just that way, and was not surprised in the least.
There were only four witches in all the Land of Oz, and two of them,
chairs; and I will tell you my story.”
Cowardly Lion, who is asleep in the poppy bed.”
until they came to the kitchen, where the Witch bade her clean the pots
“Why should I do this for you?” asked the Lady.
“That is a long story,” answered the King, with a winged laugh; “but as
“I always like to help anyone in trouble. But I must go now, for my
“What promise?” asked Oz.
which the Winged Monkeys had tossed the Scarecrow’s clothes.
closing the trap door so that no more accidents could happen.
When they reached the castle Dorothy said to the Winkies:
badly that I cannot move them at all; if I am well oiled I shall soon
covering her face with kisses. “Where in the world did you come from?”
had done his best, so she forgave him. As he said, he was a good man,
“That will be easy,” replied the man, “for when she knows you are in
“Why not call the Winged Monkeys, and ask them to carry you over the
quite frightened when she saw the great pile of shaggy wolves, but the
long pole and helped push the raft to the land.
speak.
where Dorothy and her friends were walking.
the right to command them once more.”
painted green, and when they came to a small house, in which a farmer
Lion gave a great roar and sprang towards them, and the poor Winkies
They now came upon more and more of the big scarlet poppies, and fewer
Lion’s back they all managed to scramble to the top. Then the Lion
closer to one another, for the stillness of the empty room was more
things as flowers came near to killing me, and such small animals as
raise his axe another wolf came up, and he also fell under the sharp
After climbing down from the china wall the travelers found themselves
Some of the Monkeys seized the Tin Woodman and carried him through the
only made day before yesterday. What happened in the world before that
farther into the sky.
In a moment he was out of sight.
“No, I cannot do that,” she replied, “but I will give you my kiss, and
brains I shall know everything.”
not green, for the sun had burned the tops of the long blades until
There was great rejoicing among the yellow Winkies, for they had been
shape of my head.”
So they picked up Toto and put the dog in Dorothy’s lap, and then they
“There is nothing to be done,” said the little woman calmly.
the Great Oz how to get back to Kansas again.”
But the Tin Woodman would not let her do this.
Suddenly Uncle Henry stood up.
“Why do you wish to see Oz?” he asked.
the Golden Cap.”
“Do you think,” he asked, “if I go to the Emerald City with you, that
She was both beautiful and young to their eyes. Her hair was a rich red
“I want him to give me some brains,” said the Scarecrow eagerly.
furiously hot that he turned tail and rushed from the room. He was glad
you and obey your slightest wish. There is only one thing I ask in
Toto barked sharply and made a snap at the tin legs, which hurt his
the little old woman as her only friend.
“My darling child!” she cried, folding the little girl in her arms and
and I suppose there never will be, for they don’t belong there. We
bite us?”
shut up in a room; but he had too much sense to let this worry him, so
they wanted. “How can I help being a humbug,” he said, “when all these
Introduction
tail.”
and it glistened like burnished silver.
Dorothy came to meet them and thanked the little mice warmly for saving
came to them, and four minutes later they all went into the Throne Room
when the balloon brought me here, and I am a very old man now. But my
was of a greenish tint. At his side was a large green box.
said, “you must tell me; for it is very uncomfortable walking in the
The other trees of the forest did nothing to keep them back, so they
away as easily as you could carry a feather.
“Make yourself perfectly at home,” said the green girl, “and if you
road, and then he struck at the Tin Woodman with his sharp claws. But,
found she was riding quite easily. After the first few whirls around,
Glinda The Good Witch Grants Dorothy’s Wish
thought, “I can still make her my slave, for she does not know how to
Tin Woodman wept for several minutes, and she watched the tears
One of the big trees had been partly chopped through, and standing
was used to it. But my action angered the Wicked Witch of the East, for
tied, and Quelala said a kind word for them also; so that Gayelette
the great box on all their eyes, just as he had done before. Afterward
no one will dare injure a person who has been kissed by the Witch of
“Now there is Mr. Joker, one of our clowns,” continued the china lady,
the distance carefully in his mind.
Munchkins, and white is the witch color. So we know you are a friendly
“Oh, no,” returned the soldier; “I have never seen him. But I spoke to
this is true, for I am one of them myself, and cannot be mistaken.
The little old woman took the slate from her nose, and having read the
pass the night with them; for this was the home of one of the richest
The Winkies were not a brave people, but they had to do as they were
dismay. “The house must have fallen on her. Whatever shall we do?”
Wizard, and would not be comforted.
green ribbon around Toto’s neck, and they started for the Throne Room
Therefore, as you must remain in the Palace for several days, I will
Scarecrow had done.
“My dear friends,” said Oz, “I pray you not to speak of these little
wolves and her wild crows and her stinging bees were gone, and her
“Oh, indeed,” said the Woodman, making a bow.
One by one the mice came creeping back, and Toto did not bark again,
For three days Dorothy heard nothing from Oz. These were sad days for
“Of course he’s stuffed,” replied Dorothy, who was still angry.
“I would not make you unhappy for all the world!” exclaimed Dorothy.
will promise. If you will kill for me the Wicked Witch of the West, I
the Head. Here are the other things I used to deceive you.” He showed
Lady, I shall pretend to spring upon her, and so compel her to do my
very tedious being perched up here night and day to scare away crows.”
land.
doorstep and looked anxiously at the sky, which was even grayer than
“All the same,” said the Scarecrow, “she needs a heart as much as the
When Aunt Em came there to live she was a young, pretty wife. The sun
“The road is straight to the South,” he answered, “but it is said to be
A little farther on Dorothy met a most beautifully dressed young
Witch:
Others took the Scarecrow and the Woodman and the Lion, and one little
when the City was first built, and I have the only key that will unlock
Chapter VI
eaten nothing but nuts all day, and she made a hearty meal of the ripe
first thing they came to was a china milkmaid milking a china cow. As
deeds. Look out—here I go!”
wondering how we shall get him again.”
“Why didn’t you walk around the hole?” asked the Tin Woodman.
The Scarecrow decided to think, and he thought so hard that the pins
last they grew vexed that Oz should treat them in so poor a fashion,
frail. But there are none in the forest so bright as these.”
of tin nor straw, and could not live unless she was fed.
She was awakened by a shock, so sudden and severe that if Dorothy had
the Emerald City is at the other end of the road, we must go wherever
country.”
dressed in a green uniform and wearing a long green beard.
they were the same gray color to be seen everywhere. Once the house had
and Dorothy put new paint on his eyes that he might see better. The
of my way. Whenever I’ve met a man I’ve been awfully scared; but I just
power over our band is now ended, and you will never see us again.”
worry about me. Can you help me find my way?”
clump of grass and asked, in a timid voice, “Are you sure he will not
She left Dorothy alone and went back to the others. These she also led
“Perhaps,” said the Lion thoughtfully, “if I had no heart I should not
remember that a short time ago I was up on a pole in a farmer’s
moments the entire band stood before her.
Scarecrow.
rocks, where he lay so battered and dented that he could neither move
and blue; and although the blue was somewhat faded with many washings,
“Yes, of course,” replied Oz. “I am tired of being such a humbug. If I
L. Frank Baum
could go in case one of those great whirlwinds arose, mighty enough to
Chapter XXIV
“Come along,” said the Scarecrow heartily, and Dorothy added that she
wife, and when Dorothy asked for something to eat the woman gave them
Scarecrow said, “Oh, my!”
of blue cloth, and Dorothy slept soundly in them till morning, with
truth. Then Oz asked, “What do you wish me to do?”
spectacles.”
bite him.
Winged Monkeys had also helped her in doing this. Only once more could
“Get an oil-can and oil my joints,” he answered. “They are rusted so
afraid, and that kind of courage you have in plenty.”
quick blow that cut the beast’s head clean off from its body, and it
on it, and were drawn swiftly by their queer little horses to the place
the North.”
“I can’t come back, my dear,” called Oz from the basket. “Good-bye!”
wore a white gown that hung in pleats from her shoulders. Over it were
These houses were quite small, the biggest of them reaching only as
“Doesn’t anyone else know you’re a humbug?” asked Dorothy.
giving a great spring, he shot through the air and landed safely on the
Dorothy; “and the Lion is my friend and comrade, and would not hurt you
cannot kill her yourself, how do you expect me to do it?”
“Why do you want water?” he asked.
we shall be carried into the country of the Wicked Witch of the West,
“Then, if you don’t mind, I’ll go with you,” said the Lion, “for my
Dorothy thought she would go next; so she took Toto in her arms and
by the others.
this new comrade at first, for he could not forget how nearly he had
that you appeared to me as a great Head?”
the crows, at any rate. But surely there is no use for a Scarecrow
Then the green man fitted spectacles for the Scarecrow and the Tin
sounds made the little girl’s heart beat fast, for she did not know
bondage. So she chose a number of the Winkies who looked as if they
to come any nearer. But the King Crow said:
genie, dwarf and fairy are eliminated, together with all the horrible
at everything around me with a great deal of curiosity, for this was my
life is simply unbearable without a bit of courage.”
Oz had promised to bestow on him. Dorothy fell asleep only once, and
So, the Lion being fully refreshed, and feeling quite himself again,
courageous I have grown.”
So they all entered the house, where there were, besides the woman, two
“What was that?” she asked timidly.
and all shook hands with them until their arms ached.
“What is your trouble?” asked the Lion quietly.
When the Wizard was given this message he was so frightened that he
“Where is he?” asked the Stork.
replied the Princess.
heard the pattering of tiny feet, and many of the small gray mice came
“There is no road,” answered the Guardian of the Gates. “No one ever
Chapter XIV. The Winged Monkeys
The Scarecrow and the Woodman now began to fasten the mice to the
had married her and ordered us always to keep where she could never
“But it is not a foolish errand, nor an idle one,” replied the
“Who are the wizards?” asked Dorothy.
notion which way it lies. But the first thing to do is to cross the
straight east, toward the rising sun; and they started off in the right
frightened at this and made many motions to Dorothy to relieve him, but
They had just started to cross this queer bridge when a sharp growl
two friends was right, and she decided if she could only get back to
on the hard bricks. It never hurt him, however, and Dorothy would pick
castle of the Wicked Witch and the Emerald City. When the four
“Really,” said the Scarecrow, “you ought to be ashamed of yourself for
heart disease.”
The Tin Woodman appeared to think deeply for a moment. Then he said:
covered with wrinkles, her hair was nearly white, and she walked rather
grass coming from that direction also.
two halves. Once more the tinsmith came to my help and made me a body
“I suppose so,” answered the Scarecrow. “When I have brains, I shall
The Guardian of the Gates led them through the streets until they came
Our little party of travelers awakened the next morning refreshed and
“Thank you,” he answered gratefully.
showing two rows of ugly teeth, while its red eyes glowed like balls of
She threw her arms around the Lion’s neck and kissed him, patting his
land.
probably like them better.”
he made my nose and my mouth. But I did not speak, because at that time
told him of, was much astonished; but he answered her bravely.
top and supported by a thick neck full of wrinkles. But he had no arms
Chapter VIII
which was east and which was west, and that was the reason they were
The Scarecrow sat upon the Lion’s back, and the big beast walked to the
Henry, who was a farmer, and Aunt Em, who was the farmer’s wife. Their
of the balloon over the fire so that the hot air that arose from it
“No, you are all wrong,” said the little man meekly. “I have been
Scarecrow.
Even with eyes protected by the green spectacles, Dorothy and her
of the cyclone; and there it remained and was carried miles and miles
This they decided to do. The next day they called the Winkies together
dreadful than any of the forms they had seen Oz take.
“From the Land of Oz,” said Dorothy gravely. “And here is Toto, too.
“Hil-lo, hol-lo, hel-lo!” Dorothy went on, standing this time on her
Terrible Humbug,” as she called him, would find a way to send her back
The Wonderful City of Oz
door. After picking out the silver shoe, which was all that was left of
“Why don’t you run and jump?” asked the Scarecrow.
last. Now, if you will oil the joints of my legs, I shall be all right
she came to the gate at noon and asked, “Are you ready to be harnessed
Then Toto came up, and immediately began to bark, but Dorothy made him
The Scarecrow looked at her reproachfully, and answered:
poured upon it the ball burned fiercely.
terribly wicked, and had they not thought I was more powerful than they
crush any building in its path. It was reached by a trap door in the
voice and went to the Throne Room, where he rapped upon the door.
walking with stately strides at Dorothy’s side. Toto did not approve of
Toto had jumped out of her arms and was running toward the barn,
the Great Wizard, he might be angry and destroy you all in an instant.”
some supper and a place to sleep.”
to the door and knocked.
were to be admitted at once.
“We must be very careful here,” said the kind-hearted Woodman, “or we
celebrate their freedom from the bondage of the Wicked Witch.
happiness to childish hearts than all other human creations.
city where Oz dwells the country is beautiful. But I am not afraid so
“But this is terrible,” said the Tin Woodman. “How shall I ever get my
he sprang upon the bed and rolled himself up like a cat and purred
“If it won’t float,” remarked Dorothy, “it will be of no use to us.”
instinctive love for stories fantastic, marvelous and manifestly
that was paved with yellow brick.
mice have saved my life. How strange it all is! But, comrades, what
the mark upon her forehead. The child did not know this, and was full
“Come on!” he shouted to the others. “Be quick!” They all ran forward
“Of course I cannot understand it,” he said. “If your heads were
This was to be an eventful day for the travelers. They had hardly been
bounded at her so fiercely that the Witch was afraid, and ran out and
“We must hurry and get back to the road of yellow brick before dark,”
Soon after the Scarecrow stopped.
was keeping him up so that he could not fall. She crept to the hole,
Dorothy did not say anything, for she was puzzled to know which of her
wood, in which were gathered hundreds of beasts of every variety. There
beginning to cry.
The soldier with the green whiskers led them through the streets of the
“Thank you,” replied Dorothy, and then the kind Stork flew into the air
“And you promised to give me brains,” said the Scarecrow.
“‘That’s a rather pretty eye,’” remarked the Munchkin who was watching
“So he is,” said the green man, “and he rules the Emerald City wisely
“We dare not harm this little girl,” he said to them, “for she is
unreal. The winged fairies of Grimm and Andersen have brought more
“I don’t know enough,” replied the Scarecrow cheerfully. “My head is
squeaky little voice:
put the straw back into the Scarecrow again, until he was as good as
the next, nor the next. The waiting was tiresome and wearing, and at
Our friends looked at him in surprise and dismay.
at him. No one would think of biting such a little thing, except a
obey you?”
“Really?” asked the Mouse.
“Oz was always our friend. When he was here he built for us this
Dorothy and put them over her eyes. There were two golden bands
“Neither. He’s a—a—a meat dog,” said the girl.
could call three times upon the Winged Monkeys, who would obey any
“But then I should not have had my wonderful brains!” cried the
“I have come for my brains,” remarked the Scarecrow, a little uneasily.
doing just as we pleased without calling anybody master. Perhaps some
the dog is asleep already.”
and nothing terrible happened, she stopped worrying and resolved to
were dancing. Five little fiddlers played as loudly as possible, and
“We have come to claim our promise, O Oz.”
a dainty blue color, and beyond them were fields of grain and
the Woodman was not a vain man he did not mind the patches at all.
But, seeing they were bigger than the Lion, and remembering that there
that the pail was lying in several small pieces, while the poor
by L. Frank Baum
gray place you call Kansas.”
Chapter X
friend, even if it happens to be only a mouse.”
Chapter XII. The Search for the Wicked Witch
Dorothy played with him, and loved him dearly.
through the window, followed by all his band.
“Come along, Toto,” she said. “We will go to the Emerald City and ask
she returned and asked anxiously, “Where are your joints?”
back to us as soon as possible.”
destroyed,” said the girl.
“Welcome, O King of Beasts! You have come in good time to fight our
of straw, so that I may become as much a man as any other in your
wished the girl to remain with her and do the cooking and the
“Is there anything we can do,” it asked, “to repay you for saving the
stuffed with straw, like mine, you would probably all live in the
brings knowledge, and the longer you are on earth the more experience
“Why do you have to obey the charm of the Golden Cap?” she asked.
with the enemy.
“Thank you,” he answered. “Now, if you will help me sew the silk
him, “Hereafter you will be a great man, for I have given you a lot of
“My lady fair,
“My greatest wish now,” she added, “is to get back to Kansas, for Aunt
house was small, for the lumber to build it had to be carried by wagon
friends to tell them of his good fortune.
the brains you so greatly desire.”
to make sure they kept in good working order. The Lion would have
and boots and clothes into a small bundle and threw it into the top
Emerald City. So my good luck is all due to her, and I shall never
Woodman and the Cowardly Lion; and we are going to the Emerald City.”
The Ball of Fire burned fiercely for a time, and the voice said, “Bring
started on her journey.
to do so.
“What did you say?” asked the Scarecrow, who did not know what she was
interview with the Wizard.
answered earnestly. “I don’t like your country, although it is so
“Are you going?” they asked, in surprise.
mice and little mice and middle-sized mice; and each one brought a
approached, one of them said to her:
that the long poles would not touch the bottom.
where the Scarecrow was perched upon his pole. Then the Stork with her
Those who dwelt in the East and the West were, indeed, wicked witches;
had been cut.
You will remember there was no road—not even a pathway—between the
gloomy. After the Lion had rested they started along the road of yellow
away.”
Chapter XIII
turn. The leader of the Winged Monkeys flew up to her, his long, hairy
powers to make a cyclone; but I’ve been thinking the matter over, and I
soon the band of Winged Monkeys flew in through the open window and
So they found a cozy place under the trees where they slept well until
found out soon after.
shining and white as the bottom of a big platter. Scattered around were
bringing with them all their tools in baskets, she inquired, “Can you
thought it trembled a little.
“Good-bye,” replied the Princess.
afraid of the Kalidahs.”
Chapter IX. The Queen of the Field Mice
down at Dorothy’s feet, and seeing the Silver Shoes, began to tremble
lucky it was you brought away that wonderful Cap!”
evidently lived, that also was painted green. They passed by several of
The field mouse, now that it was freed from its enemy, stopped short;
“You need fear your enemy no longer.”
more at ease, and presently Toto and the Cowardly Lion had grown to be
climb over the wall.”
Chapter XVII. How the Balloon Was Launched
useless to fight people with shooting heads; no one can withstand
So Oz brought a pair of tinsmith’s shears and cut a small, square hole
cow?”
“I didn’t bite him,” said the Lion, as he rubbed his nose with his paw
“And I should get no courage,” said the Cowardly Lion.
times the Scarecrow twisted a neck, until at last all were lying dead
great forest, flying from tree to tree, eating nuts and fruit, and
“Oh, no, my dear; I’m really a very good man, but I’m a very bad
Thereupon the Wicked Witch enchanted my axe, and when I was chopping
travelers could not pass. But the Tin Woodman set to work with his axe
bran-new brains.”
into his best shape, and the Woodman polished his tin and oiled his
another a Lion. None of them is fit to work, so you may tear them into
Then a head showed itself over the rock and the same voice said, “This
City. But my father went there once, when I was a boy, and he said it
with brains. I cannot tell you how to use them, however; you must find
used to; but neither were they very small. In fact, they seemed about
“Well,” he said with a sigh, “I’m not much of a magician, as I said;
branches shut out the daylight; but the travelers did not stop, and
in the Emerald City?”
Dorothy heard a voice say:
“I am terribly afraid of falling, myself,” said the Cowardly Lion, “but
When Dorothy awoke the sun was shining through the trees and Toto had
way. But at noon, when the sun was over their heads, they did not know
the hill, nevertheless.”
her.
found a tree full of nuts and filled Dorothy’s basket with them, so
Then a strange thing happened.
The Winkies lifted him tenderly in their arms, and carried him back to
“Who is Glinda?” inquired the Scarecrow.
known it. But how can I help it?”
her hand. But, in truth, she did not dare to strike Dorothy, because of
sorry not to do as you wish, but we must pass over your hill whether
“But you shall not!” replied the voice, and there stepped from behind
and head of the Tin Woodman, until at last he was straightened out into
head to her in a friendly way. Then she climbed down from the fence and
tree tipped and fell with a crash across the ditch, with its top
meal for herself and Toto would empty the basket. To be sure, neither
looking into her face, whining dismally to show how sorry he was for
“No,” said Dorothy, “he’s made of tin.” And she helped the Woodman up
not send me home until I have killed the Wicked Witch of the West; and
sleep.
gathered his legs under him and jumped on the wall; but just as he
Chapter II. The Council with the Munchkins
ladder was ready. The Scarecrow climbed up the ladder first, but he was
ever. So they started upon their journey once more.
Throne Room and tell Oz you are here.”
straight from the throne itself; so they walked toward it and stood in
“Oh, no,” answered the Woodman. “I shall not feel it at all.”
“You must walk. It is a long journey, through a country that is
“Good-bye!” he called after them, and they were very sorry to leave
she had promised the old woman I should not marry the pretty Munchkin
their bread, and now she did not know what they would do for breakfast.
only do away with the other Witch; but, now that you have melted her, I
the Woodman at all. And as bees cannot live when their stings are
Before they went to see Glinda, however, they were taken to a room of
After a few hours the road began to be rough, and the walking grew so
round hats that rose to a small point a foot above their heads, with
“Don’t speak of it,” replied Oz.
She ate a hearty breakfast, and watched a wee Munchkin baby, who played
of yellow brick and turned again toward the Emerald City where the
him, but tell your story and ask him to help you. Good-bye, my dear.”
lighter in weight than the air without that it pulled hard to rise into
cornfield.”
Thick, woolly hair covered every part of it, and a more
wishes to go that way.”
woman who did not want her to marry anyone, for she was so lazy she
“Which road leads to the Wicked Witch of the West?” asked Dorothy.
head and found that it fitted her exactly. She did not know anything
great desert that surrounds this Land of Oz. I’m afraid, my dear, you
and looked out with her one eye that could see far off. She saw all her
And the Lion would answer, “No. If you come in this yard, I will bite
The Magic Art of the Great Humbug
could see or feel was the wind whistling past her ears.
until all her other powers were exhausted. But now that her fierce
Before them stood a little man about the same size as the Munchkins. He
curiosity, he is most terrible, and few have ever dared ask to see his
“That is very strange,” said Dorothy, “but we must try, in some way, to
such wide-spreading branches that there was room for the party to pass
tell us the way to the Emerald City.”
and fewer of the other flowers; and soon they found themselves in the
“‘I wonder if that farmer thought to fool me in this clumsy manner. Any
“It is, indeed!” replied the Woodman, who was greatly pleased. “But is
greatest wish, and having thanked Oz warmly he went back to his
went to her own room and lay down on the bed and cried herself to
Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman.
Dorothy now took Toto up solemnly in her arms, and having said one last
forest, for there were no houses near. The tree made a good, thick
been so startled by the child’s laughter that she would scream and
made a truck out of the limbs of trees, from which he chopped away all
So after that she took no food to the imprisoned Lion; but every day
Besides, you have white in your frock, and only witches and sorceresses
“What is it?” asked the Lion.
gate, all studded with emeralds that glittered so in the sun that even
told. So they marched away until they came near to Dorothy. Then the
help to you, I am such a fool.”
they would give her more power than all the other things she had lost.
the ground, for the air within it was hot, and this made it so much
because I cannot get hurt. If anyone treads on my toes or sticks a pin
knew it was wrong for the Wildcat to try to kill such a pretty,
Dorothy began to sob at this, for she felt lonely among all these
“I will go too,” declared the Scarecrow; “but I shall not be of much
fat and looked chubby and good-natured, were dressed all in red, which
The wild crows flew in one great flock toward Dorothy and her
left clinging to the pole in the middle of the river.
then she dreamed she was in Kansas, where Aunt Em was telling her how
climb down into this great ditch. Therefore, if we cannot jump over it,
They went to bed quite early and slept soundly until daylight, when
Thanking the good woman, they started afresh and walked by the fields
But what interested Dorothy most was the big throne of green marble
their heads, wearing ermine robes and satin doublets; and funny clowns
the truck was a thousand times bigger than any of the mice who were to
lived in the forest near Gayelette’s palace, and the old fellow loved a
him up. So he kept a good distance away from the flames, and only came
“If we only had the Scarecrow with us again,” said the Tin Woodman,
to bite or scratch or struggle in any way. Then they lifted him up and
The Lion climbed the ladder next, and the Tin Woodman came last; but
“Melted! Well, that is good news, indeed,” said the man. “Who melted
So the Wizard unfastened his head and emptied out the straw. Then he
“This is my fight,” said the Woodman, “so get behind me and I will meet
Still, for many days they grieved over the loss of the Wonderful
the windows, and there was a shelf with a row of little green books.
beside it, with an uplifted axe in his hands, was a man made entirely
the magic words. The Monkeys were as prompt as ever, and in a few
reached solid ground. But here the country seemed wilder than ever, and
So I have to stay shut up in these rooms all day, and it gets tiresome.
wish for anything ring the bell. Oz will send for you tomorrow
side of the road. Indeed he was obliged to call to her to help him up
to everyone. I have heard that Glinda is a beautiful woman, who knows
shape again, and solder him together where he is broken?”
journey.”
“Who are the Munchkins?” inquired Dorothy.
Scarecrow; “it is important. And we have been told that Oz is a good
My Wife
of water and threw it over the mess. She then swept it all out the
He led the way to a small chamber in the rear of the Throne Room, and
creature, and very grateful.
himself asleep in a minute.
corner. As it fell with a crash they looked that way, and the next
and Dorothy could see where the long grass bowed in waves before the
then a strip of emerald green; for Oz had a fancy to make the balloon
They had to wait a long time before the soldier returned. When, at
little spring of clear water, where Dorothy drank and bathed and ate
“They are, indeed,” said the Scarecrow, “and I am thankful I am made of
once and get all her people. As soon as they heard her orders they ran
two great beasts with bodies like bears and heads like tigers.
and waited for the fresh breeze to waken her.
courage. But as long as the Witch lives, you must remain a coward.”
“Are any of your people tinsmiths?”
are grateful to you for the favor.”
“And you promised to give me courage,” said the Cowardly Lion.
“I cannot imagine,” replied the Scarecrow; “but we can go and see.”
holes, for the grass was so thick that it hid them from sight. However,
the journey, and there she saw the Golden Cap. She tried it on her own
“Well,” said the woman, after thinking it over and taking another peep
you had known their power you could have gone back to your Aunt Em the
“Well, one day I went up in a balloon and the ropes got twisted, so
“The Quadlings think she is good,” said the soldier, “and she is kind
“For,” he said, “if I should get caught in the rain, and rust again, I
straightway disappeared, much to the surprise of little Toto, who
“Yes,” said the Woodman, “at last I shall get my heart.”
They found the forest very thick on this side, and it looked dark and
“I am Dorothy,” answered the girl, “and these are my friends, the Tin
let him, before this beautiful creature, she looked upon him sweetly,
back. There were fewer houses and fewer fruit trees, and the farther
shape again.
“That’s all right,” said the Stork, who was flying along beside them.
too stupid and ugly to mate with one so beautiful and wise. At last,
The girl had to work hard during the day, and often the Witch
Then he led them into his little room and locked the spectacles from
and branches. Shall we go there?”
his corner, waiting for her.
“Yes,” answered the Scarecrow. “Everything is green here, while in the
opened her basket and got out some bread. She offered a piece to the
The next morning the soldier with the green whiskers led the Lion to
Kansas and Aunt Em, it did not matter so much whether the Woodman had
fastened to them that passed around the back of her head, where they
she wanted to help out her breakfast.
Witch, “so you cannot miss it. When you get to Oz do not be afraid of
and bade them good-bye. The Winkies were sorry to have them go, and
do?”
“Do you not see us?” answered the Scarecrow.
and after the Scarecrow had got down from his back the Lion sprang
and Dorothy would lie beside him and put her head on his soft, shaggy
bow and said, in a sweet voice:
nine o’clock the next morning. He had once met the Winged Monkeys in
“Why, I guess so,” Dorothy answered. “It would be as easy as to give
rainstorm, before I thought of the danger my joints had rusted, and I
Oz would give me some brains?”
a friendly little nod, whirled around on her left heel three times, and
setting them free from bondage. The houses of the Munchkins were
“I’m not feeling well,” said the Scarecrow, with a smile, “for it is
other side.”
yours.”
“And what became of them?” asked Dorothy, who had been greatly
from her long sleep and opened her eyes. She was greatly astonished to
“I cannot tell,” answered the soldier, “for nobody has ever crossed the
They walked through the forest until it became too dark to go any
but now that you have killed one of them, there is but one Wicked Witch
There were few birds in this part of the forest, for birds love the
“She was so old,” explained the Witch of the North, “that she dried up
arms stretched out and his ugly face grinning terribly; but he saw the
carry with them.
While she stood looking eagerly at the strange and beautiful sights,
mortals I am invisible. I will now seat myself upon my throne, that you
little girl.
thanked her kindly and oiled himself thoroughly with his jeweled
to find his friends waiting for him, and told them of his terrible
Tin Woodman told her all. She thanked him for saving them and sat down
“If I put an end to your enemy, will you bow down to me and obey me as
They thanked him and bade him good-bye, and turned toward the West,
“‘Never mind,’” said the farmer. “‘They are ears just the same,’” which
time. What do you command?”
do but talk to each other, but they always came to wait outside the
“Why have you come to the South Country?”
Chapter V
carry you in my basket.”
beside him. Then he called to his companions to rise, and again they
“Well, I must go to Oz and get my heart,” said the Woodman. So he
interested in the story.
the one paved with yellow bricks. Within a short time she was walking
yours, and you shall have them to wear.” She reached down and picked up
over the hill and set them down in the beautiful country of the
moment all of them were filled with wonder. For they saw, standing in
dog in her arms followed the green girl through seven passages and up
Just as he spoke there came from the forest a terrible roar, and the
country and set down in the midst of a strange land.
“Perhaps not,” said the Scarecrow, “for we mean to destroy her.”
house broke the broad sweep of flat country that reached to the edge of
around as we please. But whenever any of us are taken away our joints
doorway, they paused and whispered among themselves, as if afraid to
good-bye and sent me to you,” said the girl.
the first branches they bent down and twined around him, and the next
should kill another bug or beetle I should surely cry again, and crying
many houses made entirely of china and painted in the brightest colors.
“I have,” said the Scarecrow.
“Won’t you go with me?” pleaded the girl, who had begun to look upon
truck, using the strings they had brought. One end of a string was tied
making them slave for her night and day. Now they are all set free, and
The Search for the Wicked Witch
strangers; peck out their eyes and tear them to pieces.”
said, “Follow me and I will show you your room.”
“Come with me; and see that you mind everything I tell you, for if you
“I feel wise indeed,” he answered earnestly. “When I get used to my
way.” He then opened the gate of the outer wall, and they walked forth
“who is always trying to stand upon his head. He has broken himself so
tall stick, where you found me. He and his friend soon after walked
me carry you back to Kansas, and stand you on Aunt Em’s mantel? I could
Dorothy’s room at night to take the shoes, and her dread of water was
before them a high wall which seemed to be made of white china. It was
“There,” said he; “now you have a heart that any man might be proud of.
farmer carried me under his arm to the cornfield, and set me up on a
heard from the Guardian of the Gates that Dorothy had melted the Wicked
The four travelers walked with ease through the trees until they came
the Scarecrow.
another of the Winkies, who was a goldsmith, had made an axe-handle of
getting home, and the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman were glad to be of
hill as if he had been struck by a cannon ball.
good things to eat.
classed as “historical” in the children’s library; for the time has
the farther they advanced, and in the afternoon they suddenly came upon
me my lovely heart. I should like to cry a little because Oz is gone,
years. Gayelette made up her mind that when he grew to be a man she
three flights of stairs until they came to a room at the front of the
jump over the gulf, Dorothy would be killed, or the Tin Woodman badly
rather dizzy when Dorothy picked him up.
Scarecrow and said:
“Tell me something about yourself and the country you came from,” said
and stuffed the rest of the space with straw, to hold it in place.
required brains to figure it out, I never should have said it.”
Lion, “he would have been a brave man.”
could tear me in two as easily as I could kill Toto. I’m terribly
new heart.
come for a series of newer “wonder tales” in which the stereotyped
Forthwith there was heard a great buzzing in the air, and a swarm of
Dorothy leaves this country?”
“That is hard to tell,” said the man thoughtfully. “You see, Oz is a
at once stiffen, and we can only stand straight and look pretty. Of
Scarecrow.”
him up and set him upon his feet again, while he joined her in laughing
promised her two sheep and a cow if she would prevent the marriage.
“Go to the strangers who are within my land and destroy them all except
from top to bottom with great pieces of rock.
again—or let go—the raft was swept away, and the poor Scarecrow was
“That was one of my tricks,” answered Oz. “Step this way, please, and I
people have worn green glasses on their eyes so long that most of them
“How do you feel?” she asked.
these were all dressed in green clothes and had greenish skins. They
Dorothy was quite grieved at this mishap.
“Making believe!” cried Dorothy. “Are you not a Great Wizard?”
while Oz was alive he never was allowed to come farther than the door.
she cried out:
was only one danger—that my joints would rust; but I kept an oil-can in
were two of them and only one of him, the Kalidahs again rushed
shall be glad to serve you in any way in our power, but we cannot cross
it was still a pretty frock. The girl washed herself carefully, dressed
“If our friends, the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman, were only with us,”
“Not a bit of it,” answered the Lion. “I should like to live here all
air until they were over a country thickly covered with sharp rocks.
“Where is the Emerald City?” he inquired. “And who is Oz?”
“I am Oz, the Great and Terrible. Why do you seek me?”
brighter than he is—when you are well polished—and I am sure you will
in ruffled gowns, with round red spots upon their cheeks and tall,
“We came here to see the Great Oz,” said Dorothy.
make them comfortable.
the rest of the figure was a blue suit of clothes, worn and faded,
slaves had been scared away by the Cowardly Lion, she saw there was
“Come with me, for Oz has sent for you.”
sound was heard in the air. There was a rushing of many wings, a great
The next morning, as soon as the sun was up, they started on their way,
Stork.
On and on they walked, and it seemed that the great carpet of deadly
“Who is Aunt Em?” inquired the little old woman.
Dorothy found herself riding easily between two of the biggest Monkeys,
there was a strip of light green silk, then a strip of dark green and
several tears of sorrow and regret. These tears ran slowly down his
that pole. It was a lonely life to lead, for I had nothing to think of,
been crushed between the Lion’s great jaws. But after a time he became
You’d eaten up a poker!”
that she rolled over upon the grass several times before she knew where
I’d much rather go back to Kansas with you and be in a circus again.”
little girl who had come by the chance of a cyclone into a strange
“No, but I am their friend, although I live in the land of the North.
would not rest him to lie down, and he could not close his eyes; so he
As soon as he had spoken, the Tin Woodman began to chop, and in a short
strange creatures set the travelers down carefully before the gate of
As quick as lightning the man’s head shot forward and his neck
over. He will be glad to give you some.”
“If ever you need us again,” she said, “come out into the field and
was made from oats and oats were food for horses, not for lions. The
“So I’ll just say good-bye.”
“We wish to go to the Emerald City,” said the child, “and we have lost
“Well,” said the Head, “I will give you my answer. You have no right to
the Woodman and the Scarecrow keeping watch.
all the road bordered with trees hanging full of delicious fruits. They
barked after her loudly enough when she had gone, because he had been
hard, for he knew the Monkeys would drown in the river with their wings
his heart rattling around in his breast; and he told Dorothy he had
“Over there in the river,” answered the little girl.
Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman ate nothing at all. Toto ate a little of
When, at last, he walked into Dorothy’s room and thanked her for
“No, but you tried to,” she retorted. “You are nothing but a big
motioning the others not to touch her.
and began to spread over the clean boards of the kitchen floor. Seeing
Down the stream the raft floated, and the poor Scarecrow was left far
eyes, and the children all ran away and hid behind their mothers when
am ashamed to say that I cannot keep my promises.”
“Oh, that is different,” said the Guardian of the Gates. “No one has
Shoes had fallen off in her flight through the air, and were lost
but she felt quite lonely, and the wind shrieked so loudly all about
he watched it until the long legs stopped wiggling, when he knew it was
“We are not so unlucky,” said the new ruler, “for this Palace and the
Dorothy, and then shook their heads.
“How?” asked the Woodman.
my life. See how soft the dried leaves are under your feet and how rich
and the Woodman sharpened his axe on a green grindstone and had all his
it happens that we are three times the slaves of the owner of the
away and left me alone.
ruled the people who live in the North and South and East and West.
in the left side of the Tin Woodman’s breast. Then, going to a chest of
people, and she was never known to hurt anyone who was good. Her name
her.”
“I am Oz, the Great and Terrible. Who are you, and why do you seek me?”
everyone so long that I thought I should never be found out. It was a
Dorothy nodded gravely and the Queen made a curtsy, after which she
of the forest, and the Lion whispered to them that it was in this part
Silver Shoes gave her. So the Wicked Witch laughed to herself, and
the Wicked Witch surrounded by a crowd of monkeys, each with a pair of
“We have obeyed you as far as we were able. The Tin Woodman and the
Scarecrow, “for my head is stuffed with straw.”
her lips touched the girl they left a round, shining mark, as Dorothy
handsome red uniforms trimmed with gold braid; and as Dorothy
she would cry bitterly for hours, with Toto sitting at her feet and
heart. It makes most people unhappy. If you only knew it, you are in
left leg.
you bear upon your forehead the mark of the Good Witch’s kiss, and that
With Dorothy hard at work, the Witch thought she would go into the
“Full of courage,” replied the Lion, who went joyfully back to his
cottage, and Dorothy entered and found a bed of dried leaves in one
herself in the clean gingham, and tied her pink sunbonnet on her head.
one of the most curious things about them is that they can carry you to
Then the mice were unharnessed from the truck and scampered away
brightness of the sun. The window panes were of green glass; even the
you.”
across, the tree fell with a crash into the gulf, carrying the ugly,
counterpane. There was a tiny fountain in the middle of the room, that
a way most dangerous to his joints. But she hugged the soft, stuffed
knew the most, and they all started away. They traveled that day and
The Queen of the Field Mice
Then a low, quiet voice came from the Ball of Fire, and these were the
decide how to take care of ourselves when you came among us.”
“Take me home to Aunt Em!”
little girl like you would ever be able to melt me and end my wicked
“Go to the strangers and sting them to death!” commanded the Witch, and
“but if you go I certainly shall go with you.”
laugh. The feet of the dead Witch had disappeared entirely, and nothing
dreadful beasts.”
not been lying on the soft bed she might have been hurt. As it was, the
Monkeys nor she, herself, dare hurt the girl in any way. She looked
room; and this room contained a rusty looking cookstove, a cupboard for
“And I thought Oz was a Ball of Fire,” exclaimed the Lion.
but when he did open his eyes and roll off the truck he was very glad
But the little woman evidently expected her to answer; so Dorothy said,
the country of the Winkies she will find you, and make you all her
the Land of the West, and he did not wish to meet them again.
green girl, who was very kind to them, filled Dorothy’s basket with
he did not let them in to see him at once they would call the Winged
their rooms in high spirits. Even Dorothy had hope that “The Great and
“Do you suppose Oz could give me a heart?”
“This is the second time you have called us,” said the Monkey King,
Then the Witch looked at the big, shaggy Lion and asked, “When Dorothy
deer for you. You can roast it by the fire, since your tastes are so
“Call the Winged Monkeys,” suggested the Tin Woodman. “You have still
“That will be a hard climb,” said the Scarecrow, “but we must get over
The Cowardly Lion
“Dear me,” said the Voice, “how sudden! Well, come to me tomorrow, for
as her other surroundings. Toto was not gray; he was a little black
after sending them to undergo hardships and slavery. So the Scarecrow
“Ah,” said the Tin Woodman sadly, “I wish I had a heart to beat.”
steps, when Dorothy discovered something shining in a ray of sunshine
“Why should I give you courage?” demanded Oz.
sprinkled little stars that glistened in the sun like diamonds. The men
behind, and with it the many dangers they had met in its gloomy shades.
beast come bounding over the grass toward them. It was, indeed, a great
I could only get back to this forest, I would pass my life very happily
thought I was a great Wizard. Of course I let them think so, because
forest, and given this wonderful power in order to keep strangers out
are no witches left, nor wizards, nor sorceresses, nor magicians. But,
“I never grant favors without some return,” said Oz; “but this much I
had helped her do this. The second time was when she had fought against
“She is my aunt who lives in Kansas, where I came from.”
Just then another groan reached their ears, and the sound seemed to
she forgot where she was and fell among the poppies, fast asleep.
beast.” Here he mewed so like a kitten that Toto pricked up his ears
“You don’t need them. You are learning something every day. A baby has
“If this road goes in, it must come out,” said the Scarecrow, “and as
continued, and he pushed so hard on his long pole that it stuck fast in
Everyone seemed happy and contented and prosperous.
castle to yourself. I have been wicked in my day, but I never thought a
the people love me. I am not as powerful as the Wicked Witch was who
So, carefully and gently, they lifted Dorothy in their arms and carried
was said to be the best and wisest man in all the land, while his manly
chattering and laughing, and the sun came out of the dark sky to show
“I’m pretty well, thank you,” replied Dorothy politely. “How do you
have been to the Emerald City many times, and it is a beautiful and
sound sleep. The Scarecrow, who was never tired, stood up in another
preferred a bed of dried leaves in the forest, and did not like being
woman. “She has held all the Munchkins in bondage for many years,
the door of her castle, she happened to look around and saw Dorothy
“Very well,” said the wolf, and he dashed away at full speed, followed
party.
“The North is my home,” said the old lady, “and at its edge is the same
for they immediately took out their handkerchiefs and began to weep
“And why is that?” asked the Scarecrow.
“This funny tin man,” she answered, “killed the Wildcat and saved my
owned when he was made of flesh. The Lion declared he was afraid of
And prim as if
So Dorothy dried her eyes and said, “I suppose we must try it; but I am
build this City, and my Palace; and they did it all willingly and well.
wonderful things. There were four of them in this country, and they
powers at all I soon found out that the Witches were really able to do
The Rescue
“What is that?” asked Dorothy.
they drew near, the cow suddenly gave a kick and kicked over the stool,
of silk into proper shape the girl sewed them neatly together. First
to breakfast, after which they started again upon their journey.
“We can try,” answered the Lion.
Dorothy looked at him curiously. His head was quite bulged out at the
those who live in the North and the South, are good witches. I know
like a horse?”
think what she should do next. She could not understand how all her
“What is it?” asked the little old woman, and looked, and began to
How Dorothy Saved the Scarecrow
all over on your back, one at a time.”
it away and put it on her own skinny foot.
which were so brilliant in color they almost dazzled Dorothy’s eyes.
“Oh, yes; sit down in that chair, please,” replied Oz. “You must excuse
“I shall be glad to hear it,” she replied.
for him. “If you will come with me I’ll ask Oz to do all he can for
that the witches were all dead—years and years ago.”
her?”
In the afternoon the sun shone hot in their faces, for there were no
seemed that at last they were nearing the end of their travels. Yet it
“I’m sorry,” said the Scarecrow. “The Lion was a very good comrade for
“Is there no one who can help me?” asked Dorothy earnestly.
Dorothy blew the little whistle she had always carried about her neck
“But, I don’t understand,” said Dorothy, in bewilderment. “How was it
doors and looked at them as if they would like to ask questions; but no
all her magic powers to make him as strong and good and lovely as any
Emerald City is?”
to her?”
sad plight of her old friend, and the Lion looking sober and sorry.
“I suppose there are,” returned the Lion, “but I do not see any of them
Wicked Witch and too afraid of her not to do as she told them.
“What shall we do now?” asked Dorothy sadly.
Dorothy, “and then we can keep on to the Emerald City.”
The Deadly Poppy Field
all the people scampered out of their way, fearing the strangers would
“I will tell you my story, and then you will know.”
walking an hour when they saw before them a great ditch that crossed
Dorothy went to work meekly, with her mind made up to work as hard as
be dashed to pieces when the house fell again; but as the hours passed
“Glinda is a Good Witch, isn’t she?” asked the child.
green.
her bath. The Witch was too much afraid of the dark to dare go in
The Lion thought for a moment.
Uncle Henry never laughed. He worked hard from morning till night and
silk gown and spot it.”
only one way left to destroy Dorothy and her friends.
was an enormous Head, without a body to support it or any arms or legs
away at my best one day, for I was anxious to get the new house and my
of us were rather too full of mischief at times, flying down to pull
Chapter V. The Rescue of the Tin Woodman
beautifully carved green marble basin. Beautiful green flowers stood in
draw it; but when all the mice had been harnessed, they were able to
“I suppose so. I’ve never looked to see,” replied the Lion.
could, for some dogs see very well in the dark; and the Scarecrow
what made them; but Toto knew, and he walked close to Dorothy’s side,
to get back to Kansas.” Then she added, “But, if I do, you must give me
straighten out those dents in the Tin Woodman, and bend him back into
with straw, said, quickly, “Oh, yes; you can save our friend, the
The soldier now blew upon a green whistle, and at once a young girl,
and coming slowly up to the Woodman it said, in a squeaky little voice:
great mistake my ever letting you into the Throne Room. Usually I will
so awkward that Dorothy had to follow close behind and keep him from
the tails of the animals that had no wings, chasing birds, and throwing
“Don’t mind Toto,” said Dorothy to her new friend. “He never bites.”
“I am going to the Great Oz to ask him to give me some,” remarked the
thick woods. The road was still paved with yellow brick, but these were
heard a low rumble, as of the growling of many wild animals. Toto
believe I can make a balloon.”
greater than her fear of the dark, so she never came near when Dorothy
“What is he like?” asked the girl.
came from. Then he asked me what you looked like, and when I mentioned
been good to me. I cannot tell you how grateful I am.”
wait calmly and see what the future would bring. At last she crawled
“Then I shall never have courage,” declared the Lion.
“To the Emerald City,” said Dorothy, “to see the Great Oz.”
“Because if you did not wear spectacles the brightness and glory of the
sure Toto is nearly starved. Let us stop at the next house and talk to
So the Woodman went at once to the trees and began to work; and he soon
briskly toward the Emerald City, her silver shoes tinkling merrily on
“The best plan will be to walk along the riverbank until we come to the
At that moment Dorothy saw lying on the table the silver shoes that had
They walked along as fast as they could, Dorothy only stopping once to
dry bread will not stick in my throat.”
Dorothy, and she dressed her in one of the prettiest gowns, made of
Attacked by the Fighting Trees
The Silver Shoes took but three steps, and then she stopped so suddenly
Chapter XXI. The Lion Becomes the King of Beasts
Chapter I. The Cyclone
happy and full of fun, and enjoyed every minute of the day. This was
morning.”
Then the Guardian of the Gates put on his own glasses and told them he
her swiftly through the air until they came to the castle, where they
Today, however, they were not playing. Uncle Henry sat upon the
woman could wish. When he grew to manhood, Quelala, as he was called,
since the Queen of the Mice had given it to her. In a few minutes they
just the spot the screen had hidden, a little old man, with a bald head
Gates lived. This officer unlocked their spectacles to put them back in
time is all unknown to me. Luckily, when the farmer made my head, one
wonderful sight.
see him, or we shall have made our journey for nothing.”
Emerald City until they reached the room where the Guardian of the
Then she came out again to the Munchkins and said:
rather have a heart.”
rather live there than in any other country, be it ever so beautiful.
“Oh, your Majesty, we thought you would be killed! How did you manage
velvet all ruined by the river.
As Dorothy gazed upon this in wonder and fear, the eyes turned slowly
Finally she picked up her basket.
together were rows of emeralds, set closely, and glittering in the
in color and fell in flowing ringlets over her shoulders. Her dress was
come farther. But the little old woman walked up to Dorothy, made a low
the wolves coming.
whatever. There was no hair upon this head, but it had eyes and a nose
trick that would give her what she wanted. She placed a bar of iron in
street, and Dorothy saw that everything in them was green. Green candy
Then the Tin Woodman went back to his friends, who wished him every joy
hill. Almost as quickly as it came the head went back to the body, and
Em will surely think something dreadful has happened to me, and that
fire. As it came nearer the Tin Woodman saw that running before the
“Oh, yes. Some of us are very good tinsmiths,” they told her.
“Yes, indeed,” answered the child. “I am all tired out.”
Now the Wicked Witch had a great longing to have for her own the Silver
roared with a mighty roar: “We will!”
“Never mind the patch,” exclaimed the happy Woodman. “I am very
wrong. But the Scarecrow seized the oil-can from Dorothy’s basket and
soldier made them all wipe their feet upon a green mat before entering
two or three days to consider the matter and I’ll try to find a way to
did not know whether he would find Oz a lovely Lady or a Head, but he
time the tree fell over with a crash, whereupon the Scarecrow’s clothes
our way.”
news spread rapidly throughout the city and everyone came to see the
“That is easily done,” replied the Scarecrow. “The Tin Woodman must
“There!” cried the milkmaid angrily. “See what you have done! My cow
“Well, in a few minutes I shall be all melted, and you will have the
“Thank you very much,” said the Scarecrow, when he had been set down on
“That would make me very unhappy,” answered the china Princess. “You
“If that is so,” said the child joyfully, “I will ask them to carry me
his shaggy mane and looked thoughtful.
which he put back into the green box, and gave them many good wishes to
away she saw a Scarecrow, placed high on a pole to keep the birds from
Woodman. “When we have climbed over it, we shall know what is on the
really be very unhappy unless you give me the sort of courage that
brains, but it doesn’t know much. Experience is the only thing that
So they sat down upon the bank and gazed wistfully at the Scarecrow
“You are welcome, most noble Sorceress, to the land of the Munchkins.
“I will go with you; but I’m too much of a coward to kill the Witch,”
kept along the well-trodden path until they came to an opening in the
frightened at facing a real witch. “Oh, no, that is a great mistake.
but if it is your wish to return to Kansas, I hope you will find a
be all right again. You will find an oil-can on a shelf in my cottage.”
But the Scarecrow said, “We cannot fly, that is certain. Neither can we
room, the walls of which glistened with countless emeralds.
With these words the Witch fell down in a brown, melted, shapeless mass
“If Oz had taken a dose of the same courage he gave me,” added the
you like it or not,” and he walked boldly forward.
Now while the tinsmiths had been at work mending the Woodman himself,
signal. You must go into the Throne Room alone.”
It was lucky the Scarecrow and the Woodman were wide awake and heard
small yard with a high iron fence around it, so that he could not
In front of them, and at the end of the road of yellow brick, was a big
of fear for herself and Toto. Once the Witch struck Toto a blow with
open, and they all passed through and found themselves in a high arched
their arms until they were over the middle of the river, and then
a great spider, with a body as big as an elephant and legs as long as a
“Thank you,” replied the girl; “that is very kind of Oz.”
“But I thought all witches were wicked,” said the girl, who was half
to the farther edge of the wood. Then, to their surprise, they found
foot again. Then, being at last free to do as she chose, she ran out to
The Lion went back to the opening where the beasts of the forest were
pull the raft after me, if you will only hold fast to the tip of my
to darken the sky.
the farmer. “‘Blue paint is just the color for eyes.’
It was a bit of good luck to have their new comrade join the party, for
“I want him to send me back to Kansas, and the Scarecrow wants him to
her companion from death. She had grown so fond of the big Lion she was
drawers, he took out a pretty heart, made entirely of silk and stuffed
answered Glinda, smiling.
“Be careful!” cried the green girl. “The tears will fall on your green
“Where did you get the mark upon your forehead?” continued the voice.
“We must certainly get to the Emerald City if we can,” the Scarecrow
about the Woodman, like little heaps of fine coal.
Dorothy soon closed her eyes and fell fast asleep.
lovely Lady I shall beg hard for a heart, for all ladies are themselves
The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman and the Lion now thanked the Good
“That is a first-rate idea,” said the Lion. “One would almost suspect
So the Tin Woodman was forced to return sorrowfully to his friends and
“Who are you?” asked the Scarecrow.
being away so long.”
so large to look at as those of the Scarecrow, but you are really
towards the balloon.
beautiful Emerald City, and now he is gone he has left the Wise
walking over fields of soft grass dotted here and there with daisies
break them, and after an hour or so the travelers reached the other
“Certainly,” answered the Scarecrow. “How do you do?”
But Dorothy they did not harm at all. She stood, with Toto in her arms,
“How far is it to the Castle of Glinda?” asked the child.
was Gayelette, and she lived in a handsome palace built from great
not see even my subjects, and so they believe I am something terrible.”
moved it gently from side to side until it worked freely, and then the
“This is strange,” exclaimed Dorothy. “What shall we do?”
“‘This fellow will scare the crows fast enough,’ said the farmer. ‘He
“Does he never go out?” asked the Scarecrow.
they imagined I could do anything. But it will take more than
housework. So the old woman went to the Wicked Witch of the East, and
morning of the second day I awoke and found the balloon floating over a
awkward way in which the poor creature picked up the nuts. His padded
and houses and bridges were all painted bright red, just as they had
“I have always thought myself very big and terrible; yet such little
The Queen turned to the mice that attended her and told them to go at
Kansas—but not before.”
knee breeches with pink and yellow and blue stripes down them, and
“But isn’t everything here green?” asked Dorothy.
had to wipe every tear carefully from his face with her apron, so his
can get the Scarecrow’s clothes.”
“It has been many years since anyone asked me to see Oz,” he said,
and he was not in the least spoiled by all his good fortune. He
“Go to those people,” said the Witch, “and tear them to pieces.”
hard to get some brains. By good luck you came along and pulled me off
“Because I ask it, and you alone can grant my request,” answered the
Folklore, legends, myths and fairy tales have followed childhood
oil-can, to guard against mishap.
were careful not to hurt her.
Tin Woodman.”
Lion, and the great beast had opened his mouth to bite the dog, when
